
10 CFR Part 20 Subparts C and D - Occupational Dose Limits and Planned Special Exposures
========================================================================================


§ 20.1003 Definitions.
----------------------

As used in this part:

Absorbed dose means the energy imparted by ionizing radiation per unit mass of irradiated
material. The units of absorbed dose are the rad and the gray (Gy).

Accelerator-produced radioactive material means any material made radioactive by a particle
accelerator.

Act means the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), as amended.

Activity is the rate of disintegration (transformation) or decay of radioactive material.
The units of activity are the curie (Ci) and the becquerel (Bq).

Adult means an individual 18 or more years of age.

Airborne radioactive material means radioactive material dispersed in the air in the form of
dusts, fumes, particulates, mists, vapors, or gases.

Airborne radioactivity area means a room, enclosure, or area in which airborne radioactive
materials, composed wholly or partly of licensed material, exist in concentrations—

(1) In excess of the derived air concentrations (DACs) specified in appendix B, to §§
20.1001-20.2401, or

(2) To such a degree that an individual present in the area without respiratory protective
equipment could exceed, during the hours an individual is present in a week, an intake of
0.6 percent of the annual limit on intake (ALI) or 12 DAC-hours.

Air-purifying respirator means a respirator with an air-purifying filter, cartridge, or
canister that removes specific air contaminants by passing ambient air through the air-
purifying element.

ALARA (acronym for “as low as is reasonably achievable”) means making every reasonable
effort to maintain exposures to radiation as far below the dose limits in this part as is
practical consistent with the purpose for which the licensed activity is undertaken, taking
into account the state of technology, the economics of improvements in relation to state of
technology, the economics of improvements in relation to benefits to the public health and
safety, and other societal and socioeconomic considerations, and in relation to utilization
of nuclear energy and licensed materials in the public interest.

Annual limit on intake (ALI) means the derived limit for the amount of radioactive material
taken into the body of an adult worker by inhalation or ingestion in a year. ALI is the
smaller value of intake of a given radionuclide in a year by the reference man that would
result in a committed effective dose equivalent of 5 rems (0.05 Sv) or a committed dose
equivalent of 50 rems (0.5 Sv) to any individual organ or tissue. (ALI values for intake by
ingestion and by inhalation of selected radionuclides are given in table 1, columns 1 and 2,
of appendix B to §§ 20.1001-20.2401).

Assigned protection factor (APF) means the expected workplace level of respiratory
protection that would be provided by a properly functioning respirator or a class of
respirators to properly fitted and trained users. Operationally, the inhaled concentration
can be estimated by dividing the ambient airborne concentration by the APF.

Atmosphere-supplying respirator means a respirator that supplies the respirator user with
breathing air from a source independent of the ambient atmosphere, and includes supplied-air
respirators (SARs) and self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) units.

Background radiation means radiation from cosmic sources; naturally occurring radioactive
material, including radon (except as a decay product of source or special nuclear material);
and global fallout as it exists in the environment from the testing of nuclear explosive
devices or from past nuclear accidents such as Chernobyl that contribute to background
radiation and are not under the control of the licensee. “Background radiation” does not
include radiation from source, byproduct, or special nuclear materials regulated by the
Commission.

Bioassay (radiobioassay) means the determination of kinds, quantities or concentrations,
and, in some cases, the locations of radioactive material in the human body, whether by
direct measurement (in vivo counting) or by analysis and evaluation of materials excreted or
removed from the human body.

Byproduct material means—

(1) Any radioactive material (except special nuclear material) yielded in, or made
radioactive by, exposure to the radiation incident to the process of producing or using
special nuclear material;

(2) The tailings or wastes produced by the extraction or concentration of uranium or thorium
from ore processed primarily for its source material content, including discrete surface
wastes resulting from uranium solution extraction processes. Underground ore bodies depleted
by these solution extraction operations do not constitute “byproduct material” within this
definition;

(3)(i) Any discrete source of radium-226 that is produced, extracted, or converted after
extraction, before, on, or after August 8, 2005, for use for a commercial, medical, or
research activity; or

(ii) Any material that—

(A) Has been made radioactive by use of a particle accelerator; and

(B) Is produced, extracted, or converted after extraction, before, on, or after August 8,
2005, for use for a commercial, medical, or research activity; and

(4) Any discrete source of naturally occurring radioactive material, other than source
material, that—

(i) The Commission, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the head of any
other appropriate Federal agency, determines would pose a threat similar to the threat posed
by a discrete source of radium-226 to the public health and safety or the common defense and
security; and

(ii) Before, on, or after August 8, 2005, is extracted or converted after extraction for use
in a commercial, medical, or research activity.

Class (or lung class or inhalation class) means a classification scheme for inhaled material
according to its rate of clearance from the pulmonary region of the lung. Materials are
classified as D, W, or Y, which applies to a range of clearance half-times: for Class D
(Days) of less than 10 days, for Class W (Weeks) from 10 to 100 days, and for Class Y
(Years) of greater than 100 days.

Collective dose is the sum of the individual doses received in a given period of time by a
specified population from exposure to a specified source of radiation.

Commission means the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its duly authorized representatives.

Committed dose equivalent (HT,50) means the dose equivalent to organs or tissues of
reference (T) that will be received from an intake of radioactive material by an individual
during the 50-year period following the intake.

Committed effective dose equivalent (HE,50) is the sum of the products of the weighting
factors applicable to each of the body organs or tissues that are irradiated and the
committed dose equivalent to these organs or tissues (HE,50 = Σ wT HT,50).

Constraint (dose constraint) means a value above which specified licensee actions are
required.

Controlled area means an area, outside of a restricted area but inside the site boundary,
access to which can be limited by the licensee for any reason.

Critical Group means the group of individuals reasonably expected to receive the greatest
exposure to residual radioactivity for any applicable set of circumstances.

Declared pregnant woman means a woman who has voluntarily informed the licensee, in writing,
of her pregnancy and the estimated date of conception. The declaration remains in effect
until the declared pregnant woman withdraws the declaration in writing or is no longer
pregnant.

Decommission means to remove a facility or site safely from service and reduce residual
radioactivity to a level that permits—

(1) Release of the property for unrestricted use and termination of the license; or

(2) Release of the property under restricted conditions and the termination of the license.

Deep-dose equivalent (Hd), which applies to external whole-body exposure, is the dose
equivalent at a tissue depth of 1 cm (1000 mg/cm 2).

Demand respirator means an atmosphere-supplying respirator that admits breathing air to the
facepiece only when a negative pressure is created inside the facepiece by inhalation.

Department means the Department of Energy established by the Department of Energy
Organization Act (Pub. L. 95-91, 91 Stat. 565, 42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq.) to the extent that
the Department, or its duly authorized representatives, exercises functions formerly vested
in the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, its Chairman, members, officers, and components and
transferred to the U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration and to the
Administrator thereof pursuant to sections 104 (b), (c), and (d) of the Energy
Reorganization Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-438, 88 Stat. 1233 at 1237, 42 U.S.C. 5814) and
retransferred to the Secretary of Energy pursuant to section 301(a) of the Department of
Energy Organization Act (Pub. L. 95-91, 91 Stat 565 at 577-578, 42 U.S.C. 7151).

Derived air concentration (DAC) means the concentration of a given radionuclide in air
which, if breathed by the reference man for a working year of 2,000 hours under conditions
of light work (inhalation rate 1.2 cubic meters of air per hour), results in an intake of
one ALI. DAC values are given in table 1, column 3, of appendix B to §§ 20.1001-20.2401.

Derived air concentration-hour (DAC-hour) is the product of the concentration of radioactive
material in air (expressed as a fraction or multiple of the derived air concentration for
each radionuclide) and the time of exposure to that radionuclide, in hours. A licensee may
take 2,000 DAC-hours to represent one ALI, equivalent to a committed effective dose
equivalent of 5 rems (0.05 Sv).

Discrete source means a radionuclide that has been processed so that its concentration
within a material has been purposely increased for use for commercial, medical, or research
activities.

Disposable respirator means a respirator for which maintenance is not intended and that is
designed to be discarded after excessive breathing resistance, sorbent exhaustion, physical
damage, or end-of-service-life renders it unsuitable for use. Examples of this type of
respirator are a disposable half-mask respirator or a disposable escape-only self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA).

Distinguishable from background means that the detectable concentration of a radionuclide is
statistically different from the background concentration of that radionuclide in the
vicinity of the site or, in the case of structures, in similar materials using adequate
measurement technology, survey, and statistical techniques.

Dose or radiation dose is a generic term that means absorbed dose, dose equivalent,
effective dose equivalent, committed dose equivalent, committed effective dose equivalent,
or total effective dose equivalent, as defined in other paragraphs of this section.

Dose equivalent (HT) means the product of the absorbed dose in tissue, quality factor, and
all other necessary modifying factors at the location of interest. The units of dose
equivalent are the rem and sievert (Sv).

Dosimetry processor means an individual or organization that processes and evaluates
individual monitoring equipment in order to determine the radiation dose delivered to the
equipment.

Effective dose equivalent (HE) is the sum of the products of the dose equivalent to the
organ or tissue (HT) and the weighting factors (wT) applicable to each of the body organs or
tissues that are irradiated (HE = Σ wT HT).

Embryo/fetus means the developing human organism from conception until the time of birth.

Entrance or access point means any location through which an individual could gain access to
radiation areas or to radioactive materials. This includes entry or exit portals of
sufficient size to permit human entry, irrespective of their intended use.

Exposure means being exposed to ionizing radiation or to radioactive material.

External dose means that portion of the dose equivalent received from radiation sources
outside the body.

Extremity means hand, elbow, arm below the elbow, foot, knee, or leg below the knee.

Filtering facepiece (dust mask) means a negative pressure particulate respirator with a
filter as an integral part of the facepiece or with the entire facepiece composed of the
filtering medium, not equipped with elastomeric sealing surfaces and adjustable straps.

Fit factor means a quantitative estimate of the fit of a particular respirator to a specific
individual, and typically estimates the ratio of the concentration of a substance in ambient
air to its concentration inside the respirator when worn.

Fit test means the use of a protocol to qualitatively or quantitatively evaluate the fit of
a respirator on an individual.

Generally applicable environmental radiation standards means standards issued by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the authority of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended, that impose limits on radiation exposures or levels, or concentrations or
quantities of radioactive material, in the general environment outside the boundaries of
locations under the control of persons possessing or using radioactive material.

Government agency means any executive department, commission, independent establishment,
corporation wholly or partly owned by the United States of America, which is an
instrumentality of the United States, or any board, bureau, division, service, office,
officer, authority, administration, or other establishment in the executive branch of the
Government.

Gray [See § 20.1004].

Helmet means a rigid respiratory inlet covering that also provides head protection against
impact and penetration.

High radiation area means an area, accessible to individuals, in which radiation levels from
radiation sources external to the body could result in an individual receiving a dose
equivalent in excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv) in 1 hour at 30 centimeters from the radiation
source or 30 centimeters from any surface that the radiation penetrates.

Hood means a respiratory inlet covering that completely covers the head and neck and may
also cover portions of the shoulders and torso.

Individual means any human being.

Individual monitoring means—

(1) The assessment of dose equivalent by the use of devices designed to be worn by an
individual;

(2) The assessment of committed effective dose equivalent by bioassay (see Bioassay) or by
determination of the time-weighted air concentrations to which an individual has been
exposed, i.e., DAC-hours; or

(3) The assessment of dose equivalent by the use of survey data.

Individual monitoring devices (individual monitoring equipment) means devices designed to be
worn by a single individual for the assessment of dose equivalent such as film badges,
thermoluminescence dosimeters (TLDs), pocket ionization chambers, and personal (“lapel”) air
sampling devices.

Internal dose means that portion of the dose equivalent received from radioactive material
taken into the body.

Lens dose equivalent (LDE) applies to the external exposure of the lens of the eye and is
taken as the dose equivalent at a tissue depth of 0.3 centimeter (300 mg/cm 2).

License means a license issued under the regulations in parts 30 through 36 or part 39, 40,
50, 53, 60, 61, 63, 70, or 72 of this chapter.

Licensed material means source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct material
received, possessed, used, transferred or disposed of under a general or specific license
issued by the Commission.

Licensee means the holder of a license.

Limits (dose limits) means the permissible upper bounds of radiation doses.

Loose-fitting facepiece means a respiratory inlet covering that is designed to form a
partial seal with the face.

Lost or missing licensed material means licensed material whose location is unknown. It
includes material that has been shipped but has not reached its destination and whose
location cannot be readily traced in the transportation system.

Member of the public means any individual except when that individual is receiving an
occupational dose.

Minor means an individual less than 18 years of age.

Monitoring (radiation monitoring, radiation protection monitoring) means the measurement of
radiation levels, concentrations, surface area concentrations or quantities of radioactive
material and the use of the results of these measurements to evaluate potential exposures
and doses.

Nationally tracked source is a sealed source containing a quantity equal to or greater than
Category 1 or Category 2 levels of any radioactive material listed in Appendix E of this
part. In this context a sealed source is defined as radioactive material that is sealed in a
capsule or closely bonded, in a solid form and which is not exempt from regulatory control.
It does not mean material encapsulated solely for disposal, or nuclear material contained in
any fuel assembly, subassembly, fuel rod, or fuel pellet. Category 1 nationally tracked
sources are those containing radioactive material at a quantity equal to or greater than the
Category 1 threshold. Category 2 nationally tracked sources are those containing radioactive
material at a quantity equal to or greater than the Category 2 threshold but less than the
Category 1 threshold.

Negative pressure respirator (tight fitting) means a respirator in which the air pressure
inside the facepiece is negative during inhalation with respect to the ambient air pressure
outside the respirator.

Nonstochastic effect means health effects, the severity of which varies with the dose and
for which a threshold is believed to exist. Radiation-induced cataract formation is an
example of a nonstochastic effect (also called a deterministic effect).

NRC means the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its duly authorized representatives.

Occupational dose means the dose received by an individual in the course of employment in
which the individual's assigned duties involve exposure to radiation or to radioactive
material from licensed and unlicensed sources of radiation, whether in the possession of the
licensee or other person. Occupational dose does not include doses received from background
radiation, from any medical administration the individual has received, from exposure to
individuals administered radioactive material and released under § 35.75, from voluntary
participation in medical research programs, or as a member of the public.

Particle accelerator means any machine capable of accelerating electrons, protons,
deuterons, or other charged particles in a vacuum and of discharging the resultant
particulate or other radiation into a medium at energies usually in excess of 1 megaelectron
volt. For purposes of this definition, “accelerator” is an equivalent term.

Person means—

(1) Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or
private institution, group, Government agency other than the Commission or the Department of
Energy (except that the Department shall be considered a person within the meaning of the
regulations in 10 CFR chapter I to the extent that its facilities and activities are subject
to the licensing and related regulatory authority of the Commission under section 202 of the
Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (88 Stat. 1244), the Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation
Control Act of 1978 (92 Stat. 3021), the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 (96 Stat. 2201),
and section 3(b)(2) of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985 (99
Stat. 1842)), any State or any political subdivision of or any political entity within a
State, any foreign government or nation or any political subdivision of any such government
or nation, or other entity; and

(2) Any legal successor, representative, agent, or agency of the foregoing.

Planned special exposure means an infrequent exposure to radiation, separate from and in
addition to the annual dose limits.

Positive pressure respirator means a respirator in which the pressure inside the respiratory
inlet covering exceeds the ambient air pressure outside the respirator.

Powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) means an air-purifying respirator that uses a blower
to force the ambient air through air-purifying elements to the inlet covering.

Pressure demand respirator means a positive pressure atmosphere-supplying respirator that
admits breathing air to the facepiece when the positive pressure is reduced inside the
facepiece by inhalation.

Public dose means the dose received by a member of the public from exposure to radiation or
to radioactive material released by a licensee, or to any other source of radiation under
the control of a licensee. Public dose does not include occupational dose or doses received
from background radiation, from any medical administration the individual has received, from
exposure to individuals administered radioactive material and released under § 35.75, or
from voluntary participation in medical research programs.

Qualitative fit test (QLFT) means a pass/fail fit test to assess the adequacy of respirator
fit that relies on the individual's response to the test agent.

Quality Factor (Q) means the modifying factor (listed in tables 1004(b).1 and 1004(b).2 of §
20.1004) that is used to derive dose equivalent from absorbed dose.

Quantitative fit test (QNFT) means an assessment of the adequacy of respirator fit by
numerically measuring the amount of leakage into the respirator.

Quarter means a period of time equal to one-fourth of the year observed by the licensee
(approximately 13 consective weeks), providing that the beginning of the first quarter in a
year coincides with the starting date of the year and that no day is omitted or duplicated
in consecutive quarters.

Rad (See § 20.1004).

Radiation (ionizing radiation) means alpha particles, beta particles, gamma rays, x-rays,
neutrons, high-speed electrons, high-speed protons, and other particles capable of producing
ions. Radiation, as used in this part, does not include non-ionizing radiation, such as
radio- or microwaves, or visible, infrared, or ultraviolet light.

Radiation area means an area, accessible to individuals, in which radiation levels could
result in an individual receiving a dose equivalent in excess of 0.005 rem (0.05 mSv) in 1
hour at 30 centimeters from the radiation source or from any surface that the radiation
penetrates.

Reference man means a hypothetical aggregation of human physical and physiological
characteristics arrived at by international consensus. These characteristics may be used by
researchers and public health workers to standardize results of experiments and to relate
biological insult to a common base.

Rem (See § 20.1004).

Residual radioactivity means radioactivity in structures, materials, soils, groundwater, and
other media at a site resulting from activities under the licensee's control. This includes
radioactivity from all licensed and unlicensed sources used by the licensee, but excludes
background radiation. It also includes radioactive materials remaining at the site as a
result of routine or accidental releases of radioactive material at the site and previous
burials at the site, even if those burials were made in accordance with the provisions of 10
CFR part 20.

Respiratory protective device means an apparatus, such as a respirator, used to reduce the
individual's intake of airborne radioactive materials.

Restricted area means an area, access to which is limited by the licensee for the purpose of
protecting individuals against undue risks from exposure to radiation and radioactive
materials. Restricted area does not include areas used as residential quarters, but separate
rooms in a residential building may be set apart as a restricted area.

Sanitary sewerage means a system of public sewers for carrying off waste water and refuse,
but excluding sewage treatment facilities, septic tanks, and leach fields owned or operated
by the licensee.

Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) means an atmosphere-supplying respirator for which
the breathing air source is designed to be carried by the user.

Shallow-dose equivalent (Hs), which applies to the external exposure of the skin of the
whole body or the skin of an extremity, is taken as the dose equivalent at a tissue depth of
0.007 centimeter (7 mg/cm 2).

Site boundary means that line beyond which the land or property is not owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the licensee.

Source material means—

(1) Uranium or thorium or any combination of uranium and thorium in any physical or chemical
form; or

(2) Ores that contain, by weight, one-twentieth of 1 percent (0.05 percent), or more, of
uranium, thorium, or any combination of uranium and thorium. Source material does not
include special nuclear material.

Special nuclear material means—

(1) Plutonium, uranium-233, uranium enriched in the isotope 233 or in the isotope 235, and
any other material that the Commission, pursuant to the provisions of section 51 of the Act,
determines to be special nuclear material, but does not include source material; or

(2) Any material artificially enriched by any of the foregoing but does not include source
material.

Stochastic effects means health effects that occur randomly and for which the probability of
the effect occurring, rather than its severity, is assumed to be a linear function of dose
without threshold. Hereditary effects and cancer incidence are examples of stochastic
effects.

Supplied-air respirator (SAR) or airline respirator means an atmosphere-supplying respirator
for which the source of breathing air is not designed to be carried by the user.

Survey means an evaluation of the radiological conditions and potential hazards incident to
the production, use, transfer, release, disposal, or presence of radioactive material or
other sources of radiation. When appropriate, such an evaluation includes a physical survey
of the location of radioactive material and measurements or calculations of levels of
radiation, or concentrations or quantities of radioactive material present.

Tight-fitting facepiece means a respiratory inlet covering that forms a complete seal with
the face.

Total Effective Dose Equivalent (TEDE) means the sum of the effective dose equivalent (for
external exposures) and the committed effective dose equivalent (for internal exposures).

Unrestricted area means an area, access to which is neither limited nor controlled by the
licensee.

Uranium fuel cycle means the operations of milling of uranium ore, chemical conversion of
uranium, isotopic enrichment of uranium, fabrication of uranium fuel, generation of
electricity by a light-water-cooled nuclear power plant using uranium fuel, and reprocessing
of spent uranium fuel to the extent that these activities directly support the production of
electrical power for public use. Uranium fuel cycle does not include mining operations,
operations at waste disposal sites, transportation of radioactive material in support of
these operations, and the reuse of recovered non-uranium special nuclear and byproduct
materials from the cycle.

User seal check (fit check) means an action conducted by the respirator user to determine if
the respirator is properly seated to the face. Examples include negative pressure check,
positive pressure check, irritant smoke check, or isoamyl acetate check.

Very high radiation area means an area, accessible to individuals, in which radiation levels
from radiation sources external to the body could result in an individual receiving an
absorbed dose in excess of 500 rads (5 grays) in 1 hour at 1 meter from a radiation source
or 1 meter from any surface that the radiation penetrates.

At very high doses received at high dose rates, units of absorbed dose (e.g., rads and
grays) are appropriate, rather than units of dose equivalent (e.g., rems and sieverts)).

Waste means those low-level radioactive wastes containing source, special nuclear, or
byproduct material that are acceptable for disposal in a land disposal facility. For the
purposes of this definition, low-level radioactive waste means radioactive waste not
classified as high-level radioactive waste, transuranic waste, spent nuclear fuel, or
byproduct material as defined in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of the definition of Byproduct
material set forth in this section.

Week means 7 consecutive days starting on Sunday.

Weighting factor wT, for an organ or tissue (T) is the proportion of the risk of stochastic
effects resulting from irradiation of that organ or tissue to the total risk of stochastic
effects when the whole body is irradiated uniformly. For calculating the effective dose
equivalent, the values of wT are:


Organ Dose Weighting Factors
----------------------------

Organ or tissue                                                                                       wT
Gonads                                                                                                0.25
Breast                                                                                                0.15
Red bone marrow                                                                                       0.12
Lung                                                                                                  0.12
Thyroid                                                                                               0.03
Bone surfaces                                                                                         0.03
Remainder                                                                                             1 0.30
Whole Body                                                                                            2 1.00
1 0.30 results from 0.06 for each of 5 “remainder” organs (excluding the skin and the lens of the
eye) that receive the highest doses.

2 For the purpose of weighting the external whole body dose (for adding it to the internal dose), a
single weighting factor, wT = 1.0, has been specified. The use of other weighting factors for
external exposure will be approved on a case-by-case basis until such time as specific guidance is
issued.


Whole body means, for purposes of external exposure, head, trunk (including male gonads),
arms above the elbow, or legs above the knee.

Working level (WL) is any combination of short-lived radon daughters (for radon-222:
polonium-218, lead-214, bismuth-214, and polonium-214; and for radon-220: polonium-216,
lead-212, bismuth-212, and polonium-212) in 1 liter of air that will result in the ultimate
emission of 1.3 × 10 5 MeV of potential alpha particle energy.

Working level month (WLM) means an exposure to 1 working level for 170 hours (2,000 working
hours per year/12 months per year = approximately 170 hours per month).

Year means the period of time beginning in January used to determine compliance with the
provisions of this part. The licensee may change the starting date of the year used to
determine compliance by the licensee provided that the change is made at the beginning of
the year and that no day is omitted or duplicated in consecutive years.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1201 Occupational dose limits for adults.
----------------------------------------------

(a) The licensee shall control the occupational dose to individual adults, except for
planned special exposures under § 20.1206, to the following dose limits.

(1) An annual limit, which is the more limiting of—

(i) The total effective dose equivalent being equal to 5 rems (0.05 Sv); or

(ii) The sum of the deep-dose equivalent and the committed dose equivalent to any individual
organ or tissue other than the lens of the eye being equal to 50 rems (0.5 Sv).

(2) The annual limits to the lens of the eye, to the skin of the whole body, and to the skin
of the extremities, which are:

(i) A lens dose equivalent of 15 rems (0.15 Sv), and

(ii) A shallow-dose equivalent of 50 rem (0.5 Sv) to the skin of the whole body or to the
skin of any extremity.

(b) Doses received in excess of the annual limits, including doses received during
accidents, emergencies, and planned special exposures, must be subtracted from the limits
for planned special exposures that the individual may receive during the current year (see §
20.1206(e)(1)) and during the individual's lifetime (see § 20.1206(e)(2)).

(c) When the external exposure is determined by measurement with an external personal
monitoring device, the deep-dose equivalent must be used in place of the effective dose
equivalent, unless the effective dose equivalent is determined by a dosimetry method
approved by the NRC. The assigned deep-dose equivalent must be for the part of the body
receiving the highest exposure. The assigned shallow-dose equivalent must be the dose
averaged over the contiguous 10 square centimeters of skin receiving the highest exposure.
The deep-dose equivalent, lens-dose equivalent, and shallow-dose equivalent may be assessed
from surveys or other radiation measurements for the purpose of demonstrating compliance
with the occupational dose limits, if the individual monitoring device was not in the region
of highest potential exposure, or the results of individual monitoring are unavailable.

(d) Derived air concentration (DAC) and annual limit on intake (ALI) values are presented in
table 1 of appendix B to part 20 and may be used to determine the individual's dose (see §
20.2106) and to demonstrate compliance with the occupational dose limits.

(e) In addition to the annual dose limits, the licensee shall limit the soluble uranium
intake by an individual to 10 milligrams in a week in consideration of chemical toxicity
(see footnote 3 of appendix B to part 20).

(f) The licensee shall reduce the dose that an individual may be allowed to receive in the
current year by the amount of occupational dose received while employed by any other person
(see § 20.2104(e)).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1206 Planned special exposures.
------------------------------------

A licensee may authorize an adult worker to receive doses in addition to and accounted for
separately from the doses received under the limits specified in § 20.1201 provided that
each of the following conditions is satisfied—

(a) The licensee authorizes a planned special exposure only in an exceptional situation when
alternatives that might avoid the dose estimated to result from the planned special exposure
are unavailable or impractical.

(b) The licensee (and employer if the employer is not the licensee) specifically authorizes
the planned special exposure, in writing, before the exposure occurs.

(c) Before a planned special exposure, the licensee ensures that the individuals involved
are—

(1) Informed of the purpose of the planned operation;

(2) Informed of the estimated doses and associated potential risks and specific radiation
levels or other conditions that might be involved in performing the task; and

(3) Instructed in the measures to be taken to keep the dose ALARA considering other risks
that may be present.

(d) Prior to permitting an individual to participate in a planned special exposure, the
licensee ascertains prior doses as required by § 20.2104(b) during the lifetime of the
individual for each individual involved.

(e) Subject to § 20.1201(b), the licensee does not authorize a planned special exposure that
would cause an individual to receive a dose from all planned special exposures and all doses
in excess of the limits to exceed—

(1) The numerical values of any of the dose limits in § 20.1201(a) in any year; and

(2) Five times the annual dose limits in § 20.1201(a) during the individual's lifetime.

(f) The licensee maintains records of the conduct of a planned special exposure in
accordance with § 20.2105 and submits a written report in accordance with § 20.2204.

(g) The licensee records the best estimate of the dose resulting from the planned special
exposure in the individual's record and informs the individual, in writing, of the dose
within 30 days from the date of the planned special exposure. The dose from planned special
exposures is not to be considered in controlling future occupational dose of the individual
under § 20.1201(a) but is to be included in evaluations required by § 20.1206 (d) and (e).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1207 Occupational dose limits for minors.
----------------------------------------------

The annual occupational dose limits for minors are 10 percent of the annual dose limits
specified for adult workers in § 20.1201.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1208 Dose equivalent to an embryo/fetus.
---------------------------------------------

(a) The licensee shall ensure that the dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus during the entire
pregnancy, due to the occupational exposure of a declared pregnant woman, does not exceed
0.5 rem (5 mSv). (For recordkeeping requirements, see § 20.2106.)

(b) The licensee shall make efforts to avoid substantial variation above a uniform monthly
exposure rate to a declared pregnant woman so as to satisfy the limit in paragraph (a) of
this section.

(c) The dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus is the sum of—

(1) The deep-dose equivalent to the declared pregnant woman; and

(2) The dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus resulting from radionuclides in the embryo/fetus
and radionuclides in the declared pregnant woman.

(d) If the dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus is found to have exceeded 0.5 rem (5 mSv), or
is within 0.05 rem (0.5 mSv) of this dose, by the time the woman declares the pregnancy to
the licensee, the licensee shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph (a) of this
section if the additional dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus does not exceed 0.05 rem (0.5
mSv) during the remainder of the pregnancy.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1301 Dose limits for individual members of the public.
-----------------------------------------------------------

(a) Each licensee shall conduct operations so that—

(1) The total effective dose equivalent to individual members of the public from the
licensed operation does not exceed 0.1 rem (1 mSv) in a year, exclusive of the dose
contributions from background radiation, from any medical administration the individual has
received, from exposure to individuals administered radioactive material and released under
§ 35.75, from voluntary participation in medical research programs, and from the licensee's
disposal of radioactive material into sanitary sewerage in accordance with § 20.2003, and

(2) The dose in any unrestricted area from external sources, exclusive of the dose
contributions from patients administered radioactive material and released in accordance
with § 35.75, does not exceed 0.002 rem (0.02 millisievert) in any one hour.

(b) If the licensee permits members of the public to have access to controlled areas, the
limits for members of the public continue to apply to those individuals.

(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a licensee may permit visitors to an
individual who cannot be released, under § 35.75, to receive a radiation dose greater than
0.1 rem (1 mSv) if—

(1) The radiation dose received does not exceed 0.5 rem (5 mSv); and

(2) The authorized user, as defined in 10 CFR Part 35, has determined before the visit that
it is appropriate.

(d) A licensee or license applicant may apply for prior NRC authorization to operate up to
an annual dose limit for an individual member of the public of 0.5 rem (5 mSv). The licensee
or license applicant shall include the following information in this application:

(1) Demonstration of the need for and the expected duration of operations in excess of the
limit in paragraph (a) of this section;

(2) The licensee's program to assess and control dose within the 0.5 rem (5 mSv) annual
limit; and

(3) The procedures to be followed to maintain the dose as low as is reasonably achievable.

(e) In addition to the requirements of this part, a licensee subject to the provisions of
EPA's generally applicable environmental radiation standards in 40 CFR part 190 shall comply
with those standards.

(f) The Commission may impose additional restrictions on radiation levels in unrestricted
areas and on the total quantity of radionuclides that a licensee may release in effluents in
order to restrict the collective dose.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 20.1502 Conditions requiring individual monitoring of external and internal occupational dose.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each licensee shall monitor exposures to radiation and radioactive material at levels
sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the occupational dose limits of this part. As a
minimum—

(a) Each licensee shall monitor occupational exposure to radiation from licensed and
unlicensed radiation sources under the control of the licensee and shall supply and require
the use of individual monitoring devices by—

(1) Adults likely to receive, in 1 year from sources external to the body, a dose in excess
of 10 percent of the limits in § 20.1201(a),

(2) Minors likely to receive, in 1 year, from radiation sources external to the body, a deep
dose equivalent in excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv), a lens dose equivalent in excess of 0.15 rem
(1.5 mSv), or a shallow dose equivalent to the skin or to the extremities in excess of 0.5
rem (5 mSv);

(3) Declared pregnant women likely to receive during the entire pregnancy, from radiation
sources external to the body, a deep dose equivalent in excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv); 2 and

2 All of the occupational doses in § 20.1201 continue to be applicable to the declared
pregnant worker as long as the embryo/fetus dose limit is not exceeded.

(4) Individuals entering a high or very high radiation area.

(b) Each licensee shall monitor (see § 20.1204) the occupational intake of radioactive
material by and assess the committed effective dose equivalent to—

(1) Adults likely to receive, in 1 year, an intake in excess of 10 percent of the applicable
ALI(s) in table 1, columns 1 and 2, of appendix B to §§ 20.1001-20.2402;

(2) Minors likely to receive, in 1 year, a committed effective dose equivalent in excess of
0.1 rem (1 mSv); and

(3) Declared pregnant women likely to receive, during the entire pregnancy, a committed
effective dose equivalent in excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv).
