
--- page 1 ---
43469 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
safety, and registrants and licensees 
shall ensure that protection and safety is 
optimized.’’ Further details regarding 
the regulatory body’s responsibilities 
pertaining to optimization include 
establishing requirements for 
optimization, requiring documentation 
addressing optimization, and the 
administration of constraints (or 
thresholds) on dose, or risk, as 
appropriate. The 2022 IAEA Nuclear 
Safety and Security Glossary describes 
the purpose of constraints as boundaries 
in defining the range of options in 
optimization. 
As discussed previously in this 
notice, in order to address the problems 
of subjectivity and over-conservatism 
that were introduced over time through 
the implementation of the references to 
the ALARA principle throughout the 
NRC’s regulations, the NRC proposes 
removing these references and replacing 
them with a requirement for a graded 
approach to dose management, which 
would essentially be an application of 
the concept of optimization that, below 
the dose limits, relies on various 
existing regulatory requirements as well 
as licensees’ individual radiation 
protection programs to manage dose. 
NRC guidance would provide an 
acceptable approach for this. The graded 
approach to dose management would 
rely on a series of threshold doses below 
the regulatory dose limits and dose 
management actions to be taken at each 
threshold dose. These threshold doses 
and dose management actions would 
generally correspond to existing 
requirements in 10 CFR part 20 or other 
regulations and, therefore, should 
already be incorporated within the 
radiation protection programs of 
existing licensees to a degree 
‘‘commensurate with the scope and 
extent of licensed activities’’ as is 
currently required by § 20.1101. 
For any occupational exposure 
scenario, compliance with 10 CFR part 
20 would provide both optimization and 
reasonable assurance of adequate 
protection from radiation exposure up 
to and including planned special 
exposure events and the proposed 
planned occupational dose limit 
extensions. For example, licensees are 
required to conduct surveys, control 
access to certain areas, store material 
appropriately, and use signs, postings, 
and labels to warn workers of 
radiological hazards. These provisions 
are in effect for the full spectrum of 
radiological hazards that a licensee 
could encounter during the course of its 
licensed activities, and thus, these 
provisions form the first set of dose 
management actions below the 
regulatory dose limits that would be 
credited as part of a graded approach to 
dose management. 
Under a graded approach to dose 
management, additional dose 
management actions would apply as 
radiological hazards increase and move 
closer to the applicable regulatory dose 
limit. The dose levels corresponding to 
dose management actions are threshold 
doses in that they represent determinate 
boundaries above which a specific 
action is required and below which they 
are inapplicable (i.e., there is no 
subjectivity to when a specific dose 
management action should be taken). 
Examples of these progressively 
increasing, threshold doses for 
occupational exposure are: expected 
doses of 100 mrem/year, 500 mrem/ 
year, and 5 rem/year. Specifically, above 
an expected dose of 100 mrem/year, 
licensees are required to provide 
instructions to workers (i.e., radiation 
worker training) per 10 CFR 19.12; 
above an expected dose of 500 mrem/ 
year, or, more specifically, 10 percent of 
the applicable limit, licensees are 
required to monitor doses to individual 
workers per 10 CFR 20.1502; and above 
an expected dose of 5 rem/year (i.e., the 
regulatory dose limit), licensees can 
exercise the proposed new planned 
occupational dose limit extension of 
§ 20.1205 or the existing planned 
special exposure process of § 20.1206, if 
the situation requires higher dose. 
The NRC is developing guidance to 
further explain and provide acceptable 
approaches for implementing the graded 
approach to dose management, 
including alternative radiation 
protection measures not already set out 
in the NRC’s regulations that would 
help ensure that dose limits are not 
exceeded. The NRC’s guidance would 
explain that it would be acceptable for 
radiation protection measures under the 
graded approach to dose management to 
be supported by a comparison of the 
cost of the radiation protection measure 
(e.g., shielding, additional workers, 
robotics) to a reasonably calculated cost- 
basis of an averted person-rem. The 
proposed guidance would provide that 
one example of a reasonable cost-basis 
standard is provided in NUREG–1530, 
‘‘Reassessment of NRC’s Dollar Per 
Person-Rem Conversion Factor Policy.’’ 
Specifically, in that guidance document, 
the NRC establishes the cost of an 
averted person-rem by multiplying a 
value of a statistical life coefficient—a 
factor that corresponds to society’s 
willingness-to-pay for small reductions 
in a particular mortality risk—by a 
cancer mortality risk coefficient. The 
nominal cost of an averted person-rem 
under this standard is $5,200 (in 2014 
dollars). Taken together, this means that 
it would be acceptable for considering 
under the graded approach to dose 
management whether additional 
radiation protection measures are 
reasonable based on a need to spend 
$5,200 to avoid a person-rem of 
exposure. Consequently, if a radiation 
protection measure were more costly 
than that, the licensee would have an 
acceptable cost-justified basis for not 
implementing the measure and instead 
accruing the dose as long as that dose 
is within the regulatory dose limits or, 
if applicable, the licensee complies with 
the provisions regarding planned 
occupational dose limit extensions or 
planned special exposures. In this 
manner the graded approach to dose 
management would maintain 
occupational dose below the regulatory 
dose limits while replacing the 
subjectivity of the current ALARA-based 
regulations with objective cost-benefit 
analyses. This guidance would be 
issued subsequent to this rulemaking as 
part of the NRC’s planned two-phased 
approach to issuing guidance associated 
with this rulemaking, see Section VI, 
‘‘Availability of Guidance,’’ for more 
information. 
As part of this rulemaking, the NRC 
also proposes to require a graded 
approach to dose management with 
respect to public dose in place of the 
existing implementation of the ALARA 
principle. The objective is to maintain a 
layered protective approach to potential 
public dose as a precautionary measure. 
Public dose differs from occupational 
exposure in several key respects. First, 
the dose to individual members of the 
public is generally calculated based on 
an exposure scenario, whereas 
occupationally exposed individuals are 
usually monitored. For example, with 
respect to nuclear power plant effluents, 
the member of the public is assumed to 
be a hypothetical maximally exposed 
individual who represents the 
maximum exposure regarding food 
consumption, occupancy, and other 
usage in the vicinity of the plant site. 
Another example is that for a waiting 
room in a medical facility, the facility 
may conduct area monitoring and 
assume conservative occupancy of the 
waiting room. Another difference 
between public dose and occupational 
dose is that the dose limit itself is much 
lower for the public than for 
occupationally exposed individuals 
(i.e., 100 mrem/year vs. 5,000 mrem/ 
year, respectively), and the public dose 
limit represents a very low level of risk. 
Specifically, as described in Table 12– 
4 of the BEIR VII report, the average 
lifetime risk of dying from cancer is 20 
percent, and a lifetime (i.e., 70 years) of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 2 ---
43470 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
exposure at the public dose limit of 100 
mrem/year would conservatively result 
in an addition of only 0.35 percent to 
that average lifetime risk. Importantly, 
the public dose limit is based on the risk 
of cancer mortality to a large population 
that is assumed to be exposed at the full 
limit for a lifetime. However, as just 
mentioned in the nuclear power plant 
effluent and medical waiting room 
examples, in practice, licensees 
calculate bounding doses to smaller 
subsets of the population and use the 
parameters in those calculations to 
control doses (e.g., reducing effluents 
from power plants or installing 
shielding around medical equipment). 
This means that the actual dose to the 
average member of the public from NRC 
licensed activities is assuredly below 
the limit, and thus, that that individual 
faces an even smaller risk than the 
already small risk that is assumed by a 
lifetime of exposure at the limit. 
Because of these inherent 
conservatisms, the NRC would explain 
in guidance that one acceptable way of 
managing dose below the public dose 
limit—which management would be 
required under the proposed new 
graded approach to dose management— 
is to perform cost-benefit analyses using 
the assumptions of NUREG–1530, or 
equivalent assumptions, for any doses to 
members of the public that are projected 
to be greater than or equal to 25 percent 
of the public dose limit (i.e., 25 mrem/ 
year). In addition, this approach to 
managing public dose would also be 
acceptable because the existing 
precautions in 10 CFR part 20 (e.g., 
waste disposal regulations in subpart K) 
or other regulations intended to limit 
public dose (e.g., 10 CFR 50.36a) are 
sufficient to manage doses to the public 
within the public dose limits as 
required by § 20.1101. Stated another 
way, the assumptions in the calculation 
of public dose and in the public dose 
limit itself, in combination with 
already-existing NRC requirements 
related to dose management, make it so 
that it is acceptable to comply with the 
proposed new graded approach to dose 
management by not analyzing projected 
public doses below 25 mrem/year and 
by performing a cost-benefit analysis for 
projected public doses greater than or 
equal to 25 mrem/year. This approach 
would essentially reestablish the 
original intent of the ALARA principle 
of minimizing dose below limits to the 
extent that doing so is reasonably 
achievable and would ensure that dose 
limits are not exceeded. Again, as with 
the implementation of the proposed 
new graded approach to dose 
management for occupational dose, 
whereas the NRC’s proposed guidance 
provides one way by which a licensee 
can satisfy that requirement for public 
dose, licensees may propose other ways 
to satisfy the requirement. 
Effluents 
The NRC’s regulations include 
requirements for maintaining control 
over the release of radioactive material 
to the environment during normal 
reactor operations. For example, under 
§ 50.34a and § 50.36a, the NRC requires 
nuclear power plant licensees to include 
in their facilities measures to control 
radiological effluents to the 
environment—including via monitoring 
and control systems—and to have in 
their licenses technical specifications to 
control the release of effluents. For 
power reactors, Appendix I to 10 CFR 
part 50 provides numerical design 
objectives regarding effluents. These 
design objectives are translated into 
performance criteria that are reflected in 
plant-specific technical specifications. 
In these requirements, effluents are 
quantified using the calculated dose that 
a member of the public would receive 
when exposed to the effluents under 
limiting conditions, i.e., the 
hypothetical maximally exposed 
individual who represents the 
maximum exposure regarding food 
consumption, occupancy, and other 
usage in the vicinity of the plant site. 
A similar requirement regarding air 
emissions for licensees not subject to 
§ 50.34a and § 50.36a is provided in 
§ 20.1101(d). These requirements were 
added to the NRC’s regulations to 
provide design objectives and 
constraints to ensure that radioactive 
effluents (and thus the resulting public 
doses) would be maintained consistent 
with the ALARA principle. 
Additionally, the NRC has used these 
types of regulations to meet 
environmental protection-related 
obligations under the Clean Air Act 
(CAA) and to demonstrate compliance 
with the environmental protection 
standards for nuclear power operations 
under 40 CFR part 190. In NUREG– 
0543, the NRC describes how a licensee 
would be in compliance with the dose- 
based requirement in 40 CFR part 190, 
if the licensee maintains effluents below 
the numerical criteria of Appendix I to 
10 CFR part 50. 
In the context of the CAA, the NRC 
has historically worked with the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
to develop effluent standards that are 
sufficiently low to support EPA 
determinations and to ensure that NRC 
licensees are not subjected to redundant 
regulation from multiple agencies (see, 
e.g., 42 FR 2858, 54 FR 51654, and 61 
FR 65120). As part of the development 
of the current air emissions constraint in 
§ 20.1101(d), the NRC ensured that the 
value of that constraint would be such 
that the Administrator of the EPA could 
determine that the constraint provided 
‘‘ample margin of safety,’’ as is required 
under Section 112(d)(9) of the CAA. 
This ‘‘ample margin’’ determination is 
explained in the proposed and final 
rules that promulgated the National 
Emissions Standards for Hazardous 
Pollutants (NESHAPs) for radionuclides 
(54 FR 9612 and 54 FR 51654, 
respectively). EPA supported its 
determination that the NRC’s 
regulations would satisfy the ‘‘ample 
margin’’ statutory requirement with 
studies of air emissions from NRC and 
Agreement State licensees. In total, 
these studies considered air emissions 
from 412 facilities on an annualized 
basis. EPA found that air emissions from 
most facilities do not result in doses 
exceeding 1 mrem/year with a small 
percentage of facilities approaching, but 
none exceeding, 10 mrem/year. 
As part of its response to E.O. 14300, 
the NRC reconsidered risk analyses that 
are based on the LNT model and the 
implementation of the ALARA 
principle, as described elsewhere in this 
proposed rule. As it pertains to doses to 
members of the public, the NRC 
maintains that there is reasonable 
assurance that public health and safety 
is adequately protected at all doses 
below the NRC’s current regulatory dose 
limit of 100 mrem/year. Dose reduction 
below this limit in and of itself is not 
necessary for ensuring the public health 
and safety; instead, as clarified by this 
proposed rulemaking, dose reduction 
serves the purpose of ensuring that 
ample margin exists to the regulatory 
dose limit and thus ensures that the 
limit is not exceeded. Regarding the 
contribution of effluents to public dose, 
this margin to the dose limit is 
maintained by the requirements in the 
NRC’s regulations that pertain to the 
monitoring and control of effluents and 
by licensees’ actions to manage dose, 
which could include performing cost- 
benefit analyses to support decision 
making on additional measures for 
controlling doses below the dose limits. 
Accordingly, the NRC is proposing 
revisions to radionuclide emissions 
standards in 10 CFR 50.34a, 10 CFR 
50.36a, 10 CFR part 50 Appendix I, and 
10 CFR 20.1101(d) because it has 
determined that they are excessively 
cautious and overly burdensome. 
Specifically, the NRC is proposing to 
increase its radionuclide emissions 
standards from the current regulatory 
constraint in 10 CFR 20.1101(d) of 10 
mrem per year to 25 mrem per year. The 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 3 ---
43471 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
NRC’s position is that this would 
remove excess conservatisms while 
continuing to provide an adequate basis 
to EPA that the NRC’s regulatory 
framework provides ‘‘ample margin of 
safety to protect the public health’’ 
under section 112(d)(9) of the CAA. To 
illustrate, in its proposed NESHAP rule 
for radionuclides, the EPA characterized 
the maximum lifetime risk of fatal 
cancer from natural background 
radiation from all sources, including 
naturally occurring radon, as 
approximately 1x10¥2, or 1 case per 100 
people. Using a current, widely 
accepted, and likely conservative cancer 
risk coefficient of 5x10¥4 per rem (see 
NCRP 180, Section 4.1), an individual 
receiving a dose of 10 mrem per year, 
the current regulatory constraint in 10 
CFR 20.1101(d), for 70 years would 
experience an excess fatal cancer risk of 
3.5x10¥4, or about 0.04 cases per 100 
people. If the dose to that individual 
were raised to 25 mrem per year, the 
proposed new regulatory constraint, for 
70 years, the individual would 
experience an excess fatal cancer risk of 
8.7x10¥4, or about 0.09 cases per 100 
people. When compared to the baseline 
lifetime risk of fatal cancer of 
approximately 0.2 (e.g., as provided in 
Table 12–4 of the BEIR VII report), or 20 
cases per 100 people, the risks of these 
environmental levels of radiation 
exposure, at both 10 mrem per year and 
25 mrem per year, are a small fraction 
and well below the 100 mrem per year 
public dose limit. 
In addition to reconsidering its 
current radionuclide emissions 
standards through a risk perspective, the 
uncertainties associated with risk 
estimates based on extrapolations from 
high-dose and high-dose-rate data 
provide additional support for the 
NRC’s position that its proposed 
increase to its radionuclide emissions 
standards would remove excess 
conservatisms while still providing 
reasonable assurance of adequate 
protection of the public health and 
safety and would also continue to 
support EPA’s determination that the 
NRC’s standards provide an ample 
margin of safety under the CAA. 
Adjustments in the slope of the dose 
response curve, such as is done with the 
DDREF, are helpful in the extrapolation 
of high-dose/high-dose-rate data to low 
doses; however, there is subjectivity and 
potential conservatism associated with 
this adjustment. Additionally, there is 
evidence for adaptive cellular response, 
which would mitigate the health effects 
of exposures at low doses, especially 
those resulting from effluents. The NRC 
determined that these uncertainties 
were undervalued in the establishment 
of the radionuclide emissions standards 
that the NRC currently uses. 
The NRC’s proposed approach to the 
regulation of effluents would involve 
allowing licensees to continue using the 
existing effluent constraints of 10 mrem 
per year or allowing licensees to use a 
new constraint of 25 mrem per year 
TEDE or TED, as applicable. Regardless 
of the constraint used by a licensee, if 
the licensee demonstrates that its 
effluents are below the 25 mrem per 
year level, it would only be required to 
collect and retain effluent data on an 
annual basis and in a format that can be 
inspected by the NRC. If a licensee 
releases effluents greater than or equal 
to the 25 mrem per year constraint, that 
licensee would be required to collect 
and retain effluent data and submit 
relevant reports to the NRC on an 
annual basis until levels are returned to 
below the 25 mrem per year constraint. 
Additionally, such a licensee would be 
required to evaluate and consider 
implementing cost-justified corrective 
actions to restore effluent levels to 
below the 25 mrem per year constraint. 
NRC guidance would provide that one 
acceptable method for performing this 
evaluation would be to use the dollar 
per person rem value from NUREG– 
1530. If a cost analysis demonstrates 
that corrective actions are not justified, 
the licensee could propose a new 
constraint that would support continued 
operations in a cost-justified manner, 
but this new constraint would be 
required to be below the public dose 
limit. A similar approach would be 
taken during the licensing of a new 
facility, i.e., a constraint higher than the 
regulatory constraint, but lower than the 
public dose limit, could be proposed as 
needed to support operations in a cost- 
justified manner. These changes are 
being proposed to §§ 20.1101(d), 50.34a, 
and 50.36a and to appendix I to 10 CFR 
part 50. To avoid disruptions to existing 
licensees, the NRC is proposing these 
changes such that existing effluent 
programs will remain compliant with 
the NRC’s requirements, as amended, 
and that licensees can adopt changes on 
a voluntary basis. 
The NRC understands that its 
radionuclide emissions constraint 
relates to EPA’s ample margin 
determination under section 112(d)(9) of 
the CAA. According to CAA section 
112(d)(9), the EPA must consult with 
NRC prior to a new or revised ample 
margin determination. The NRC’s 
proposed position is that the proposed 
change to its radionuclide emissions 
constraint could continue to provide an 
adequate basis to EPA for such a 
determination. 
Additionally, the NRC is proposing to 
revise paragraph C of Section IV of 
Appendix I to 10 CFR part 50 to add 
‘‘§ 52.110’’ to the applicability of the 
provisions in that paragraph. This is an 
editorial change to make paragraph C 
consistent with the applicability 
specified in the introductory paragraph 
of Section IV. 
Planned Occupational Dose Limit 
Extension 
In the NRC’s current regulations, 
planned special exposures (PSEs) (see 
10 CFR 20.1206) allow occupationally 
exposed individuals to receive doses in 
excess of the applicable limit to a 
maximum of twice the applicable limit 
in one year, provided that certain 
criteria are met (e.g., documentation 
tracking lifetime dose and remaining 
bank of PSE-dose). There is a cap on 
PSE-dose of five times the applicable 
limit over the lifetime of an individual. 
To ensure compliance with this lifetime 
cap, a licensee must ascertain the 
lifetime exposure history of an 
individual prior to conducting a PSE of 
that individual. Additionally, a PSE is 
viewed as a tool to be used only during 
exceptional circumstances. As such, 
PSEs involve additional reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements when 
compared to routine occupational 
exposures. Since the NRC added the 
regulations allowing for PSEs in the 
1991 revisions to 10 CFR part 20, PSEs 
have not been used by licensees, as 
demonstrated through a lack of reports 
having been submitted to the NRC per 
§ 20.2204. 
The NRC has determined that the 
administrative burden associated with 
PSEs (e.g., determination of lifetime 
exposure histories and additional 
reporting requirements) combined with 
the characterization of a PSE as a tool 
to be used only in exceptional 
circumstances is not commensurate 
with the radiological risk involved with 
exposures at occupational levels. 
Additionally, the increased 
administrative burden associated with 
PSEs likely dissuades licensees from 
viewing PSEs as a viable option for 
occupational dose management. Given 
this background and to enable flexibility 
in the balancing of occupational 
exposure with operational needs, the 
NRC is proposing to codify in 10 CFR 
20.1205 a new process for allowing 
workers to receive doses in excess of 
applicable annual limits: the planned 
occupational dose limit extension 
(DLE). This optional process would 
make available to licensees a method to 
manage a justified, pre-planned 
exceedance of annual occupational 
limits for workers, provided that an 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 4 ---
43472 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
adequate decision-making process is 
applied to support its use and that the 
overall dose is limited within specified 
multi-year average values and annual 
limits are limited to twice the applicable 
limit. Although the NRC is also 
maintaining the current PSE process in 
its regulations, the proposed new 
planned occupational DLE would be 
less burdensome for licensees to 
implement while still maintaining 
occupational doses, and thus the 
underlying risk, within acceptable 
values. 
The proposed new planned 
occupational DLE would allow licensees 
to access, in the current year, 
occupational dose that was not given to 
a worker in previous years. Dose limits 
generally serve two purposes: (1) to 
avoid nonstochastic/deterministic 
effects, also called tissue effects, and (2) 
to manage stochastic risk to an 
acceptable level. Nonstochastic/ 
deterministic effects, or tissue reactions, 
are effects that are only seen once a 
threshold is exceeded and their severity 
is dependent upon the dose received. 
Protraction of dose reduces the risk of 
nonstochastic/deterministic effects 
especially at doses below the threshold 
because the body is able to heal the 
biological damage resulting from the 
dose received. Stochastic effects are 
random in nature; they are not subject 
to a threshold and the severity of the 
health effect is independent of the dose 
received. Currently accepted models 
assume that for stochastic effects the 
likelihood/risk of an adverse health 
effect occurring increases 
proportionately with dose. Each of the 
NRC’s occupational dose limits 
functions to limit the risk of adverse 
health effects associated with radiation 
exposure to levels that have been 
determined to be acceptable for routine 
occupational situations. 
Occupationally exposed individuals 
rarely approach even small fractions of 
applicable dose limits (see NUREG– 
0713) because of licensees’ existing dose 
management efforts, which are generally 
founded on ALARA practices. In 
general, the fact that the risk from 
radiation exposure has been made 
negligible because of these dose 
management efforts is a net benefit. 
However, it is likely that these measures 
have resulted from overly conservative 
decision-making. Additionally, some 
licensees use locally developed 
administrative limits to maintain margin 
to occupational dose limits. 
Occasionally, normally during 
maintenance periods, licensees may 
encounter the need for workers to be 
exposed to doses in excess of annual 
limits but still within the standards for 
protecting against the health effects of 
radiation exposure (e.g., long-term 
averages with respect to lifetime doses). 
In these cases, in part to avoid the 
added burden of PSE use, licensees 
employ additional measures (e.g., 
shielding) or use additional workers to 
spread out the dose so as to maintain 
individual doses below limits. However, 
these actions may increase the cost and 
the time associated with the work in a 
manner that is not commensurate with 
the risk associated with the dose. 
To encourage more reasonable 
decision-making regarding doses at 
levels corresponding to occupational 
exposures, consistent with the original 
intent of the ALARA principle and the 
proposed graded approach to dose 
management, the NRC is proposing to 
add to its regulations the planned 
occupational DLE process to allow 
licensees to periodically exceed 
applicable dose limits for an individual 
worker provided that certain criteria are 
met. The NRC proposes to define the 
dose allowed for a planned occupational 
dose limit extension as the occupational 
exposure that was unused by the 
individual over the most recent 5-year 
period. For example, for the TEDE limit 
of § 20.1201(a)(1), this would mean the 
dose available is equal to the product of 
5 years and 5 rem TEDE, totaling 25 rem 
TEDE, minus the actual annual TEDE 
received by the individual in the current 
year and the preceding 4 years. A 
similar approach can be used to 
determine the allowable dose for a 
planned occupation dose limit 
extension of the deterministic limits, 
with the exception of the lens dose 
limit. Licensees would be able to apply 
this allowable dose, or ‘‘retrospective 
dose,’’ up to a total dose of twice the 
applicable annual dose limit in the 
current year. Thus, the annual limit for 
the planned occupational dose limit 
extension would be consistent with the 
dose that is allowed through the 
planned special exposure, with the 
exception of lens dose. 
The safety basis for the proposed new 
planned occupational dose limit 
extension process relies on the fact that 
annual dose limits are derived with the 
intent to limit total lifetime exposure to 
an individual worker and to preclude 
deterministic effects. However, because 
total lifetime exposure is not a practical 
value to measure, radiation protection 
standards prescribe annual stochastic 
limits that are essentially fractionated 
lifetime totals. Therefore, the annual 
stochastic limits in and of themselves 
should not be viewed as demarcations 
of safety or thresholds above which 
health effects are expected. Instead, they 
are regulatory tools to manage the long- 
term risks of exposure. As such, these 
limits can safely be exceeded to a 
certain extent in the short-term, 
provided that long-term doses continue 
to be controlled adequately. When an 
occupationally exposed individual 
receives an annual dose below the 
annual limit, that individual is 
experiencing a smaller risk than was 
originally assumed to be acceptable for 
a radiation worker in developing the 
annual dose limits. In general, this is a 
positive outcome, primarily because of 
the corresponding reduction in risk that 
is associated with reductions in dose 
inherent to the statistical nature of 
stochastic effects. However, this also 
means that there often exists unused 
retrospective dose that could be safely 
used, provided that an adequate 
decision-making process is applied to 
support its use and that the overall dose 
is limited within specified multi-year 
average values. Deterministic effects 
would not result from the planned 
occupational dose limit extension 
process because those effects are only 
seen when certain thresholds are 
exceeded, and the restrictions on the 
planned occupational dose limit 
extension process would maintain doses 
below those thresholds. 
The proposed new planned 
occupational dose limit extension 
process, as described in § 20.1205, 
would allow a licensee to authorize an 
individual worker to receive a dose in 
excess of annual occupational dose 
limits provided that (1) the licensee 
does not authorize a dose that would 
cause the individual to receive twice the 
applicable annual dose limit in a year, 
and (2) sufficient retrospective dose is 
available to the individual. This process 
would also entail limitations and 
reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements. For example, approval of 
a planned occupational dose limit 
extension for an adult worker must be 
in writing before the exposure occurs; 
the individual must be informed of the 
purpose of the planned operation, 
estimated doses and their associated 
risks, and measures taken to manage 
doses; and the licensee must determine 
the occupational exposure of the 
individual during the current and 
preceding four years (see 10 CFR 
20.1205). Furthermore, declared 
pregnant women and minors would not 
be allowed to participate in planned 
occupational dose limit extensions. 
Additionally, because of the uncertainty 
associated with the health risks of lens 
dose, as discussed previously in this 
document, the NRC has decided to 
exclude exceeding the annual lens dose 
limit from the proposed new planned 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 5 ---
43473 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
occupational dose limit extension 
process; however, licensees could still 
use the current PSE process, which will 
remain in the NRC’s regulations 
(including the required lifetime dose 
determination), in situations that 
involve a need to exceed the annual lens 
dose limit. Finally, the requirement to 
implement a graded approach to dose 
management would also apply to the 
management of the doses received 
during planned occupational dose limit 
extensions such that unnecessary 
occupational exposure would be 
avoided and radiation protection 
practices would be employed 
commensurate with the risks involved. 
Public Dose Limits 
The NRC is not proposing to change 
its current public dose limit, which is 
100 mrem per year. The NRC considered 
several recommendations to change the 
public dose limit. As described 
previously, the 2015 PRMs requested an 
increase in the public dose limit based, 
in part, on the assertion that radiation 
exposure is beneficial. Additionally, the 
Idaho National Laboratory—a U.S. 
National Laboratory dedicated to energy 
research and development—recently 
suggested in a public report 
(‘‘Reevaluation of Radiation Protection 
Standards for Workers and the Public 
Based on Current Scientific Evidence,’’ 
INL/RPT–25–85463, Revision 0, July 
2025) that the public dose limit be 
raised, in part, to increase public 
acceptance of radiation exposure. 
The NRC regulates the civilian use of 
radioactive materials in a manner that 
provides reasonable assurance of 
adequate protection of the public health 
and safety. Although the current public 
dose limit is sufficient to provide 
reasonable assurance of adequate 
protection of the public health and 
safety, the NRC understands that it is a 
generic limit and, thus, may be overly 
conservative in certain, specific 
circumstances. The NRC also recognizes 
that a number of factors may weigh in 
favor of allowing a higher public dose 
limit on a case-by-case basis when such 
conservatisms are specifically identified 
and accounted for, including why such 
an allowance would remain protective 
of the public health and safety. As 
discussed previously, in response to 
E.O. 14300 section 5(b), the NRC 
reexamined its approach to radiation 
protection and recognizes that there are 
inherent limitations in the LNT model, 
particularly at low doses, that could be 
better addressed in the NRC’s rules. One 
example is the decision in the NRC’s 
1991 rulemaking to disallow exceptions 
to the public dose limit for new 
applicants. Upon reexamination, such a 
limitation is not needed for reasonable 
assurance of adequate protection of 
public health and safety and is also 
inconsistent with the principles of the 
E.O.s discussed in this document 
concerning enabling the use of nuclear 
power, particularly in light of the 
declared energy emergency in E.O. 
14156. Taken together, these factors 
weigh in favor of the NRC reconsidering 
whether exceptions to the generic 
public dose limit of 100 mrem per year 
may be allowed. Therefore, although it 
is not proposing to change its current 
public dose limit or define specific 
exceptions to that limit, the NRC is 
proposing revisions to the regulations in 
§ 20.1301 that would allow a licensee or 
an applicant to request alternative 
public dose limits on a sufficiently 
supported, case-by-case basis. 
First, in § 20.1301(b), the NRC is 
proposing a path to enable a licensee or 
applicant to request prior NRC 
authorization for a public dose limit in 
excess of 100 mrem per year for 
members of the public who have access 
to controlled areas. Such requests may 
be on a generic basis (e.g., for a design). 
A controlled area, as defined in 
§ 20.1003, is an area, outside of a 
restricted area but inside the site 
boundary, to which access can be 
limited by the licensee for any reason. 
The NRC’s current regulations extend 
the public dose limit to all areas within 
the site boundary. However, this 
approach may be excessively restrictive 
if dose is appropriately managed in the 
controlled areas. This is because 
members of the public do not maintain 
a lifetime of continuous occupancy in 
spaces within the controlled area 
boundary of licensed facilities. Instead, 
members of the public typically access 
these spaces on a temporary basis for 
such non-occupational-exposure 
purposes as tours, awaiting for or 
accompanying those receiving medical 
treatments, or work activities separate 
from those of the facility like making 
deliveries to/from the facility. Further, it 
is reasonable to assume that the majority 
of these individuals will be adults and 
that the time of exposure of any 
children will be small when compared 
to the lifetime of exposure that is 
considered when determining 
acceptable risks for stochastic health 
effects. 
Therefore, the NRC is proposing to 
amend its regulations to provide that, as 
long as a licensee or applicant 
establishes appropriate dose 
management measures (e.g., signage, 
information briefings and area 
monitoring to ensure compliance with 
the proposed higher annual dose limit), 
a higher public dose limit within the 
controlled area may be approved on a 
case-by-case basis. The NRC’s case-by- 
case review would consider such things 
as the likely cumulative exposure of a 
member of the public under the 
proposed new dose limit given the time 
that the member of the public is 
expected to be within the controlled 
area and the effectiveness of the 
proposed dose management measures. 
Second, in § 20.1301(d), the NRC is 
proposing to remove references to 
ALARA, to remove the upper limit on 
the annual dose limit for a member of 
the public that may be requested (which 
is currently set at 500 mrem per year), 
and to specify the information that is 
required in an application by a licensee 
or applicant for prior NRC 
authorization, on a case-by-case basis, 
for a public dose limit in excess of 100 
mrem per year. The regulation at 
§ 20.1301(d) was originally intended to 
provide a process for facilities existing 
at the time of the regulatory changes 
implemented in 1991 that found it 
difficult to meet the then newly enacted 
public dose limit of 100 mrem per year 
(see 56 FR 23360). However, the NRC 
now proposes to clarify that any 
licensee or applicant can apply for a 
higher public dose limit by providing 
the information required by the 
regulation, which the NRC will review 
on a case-by-case basis. Specifically, 
such an application must: (1) 
demonstrate the need for and the 
expected duration of operations in 
excess of the public dose limit; (2) 
describe the licensee’s program to assess 
and control dose within the proposed 
higher limit; and (3) provide a 
supporting basis for the proposed higher 
limit, including why it remains 
protective of the public health and 
safety. Such a request for a higher 
public dose limit for the unrestricted 
area would require a more detailed 
analysis than a request for a higher 
public dose limit for the controlled area 
because of the lack of control that a 
licensee can exert over the unrestricted 
area and the presumably larger 
population that could potentially be 
subject to the proposed higher doses. 
Because of the statistical nature of 
stochastic health effects, the larger the 
population that receives a given dose, 
the larger the potential health impact. 
Therefore, it is likely that the NRC 
would generally reserve approvals for 
higher public dose limits that are 
limited in duration and/or demonstrated 
to have limited population impacts. 
In their applications, in order to 
demonstrate that the requested higher 
public dose limit remains protective of 
the public health and safety, licensees 
and applicants could apply the critical 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 6 ---
43474 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
group or representative person concepts 
described in ICRP Publication 101, and 
earlier ICRP references, to perform 
prospective dose assessments. 
Determinate or probabilistic 
assessments, or a combination of both, 
could be used to support the request. 
Habit data and physiological 
characteristics should be representative 
of the affected population and not 
overly conservative in terms of 
assumptions. Additionally, licensees 
and applicants may consider the use of 
dose constraints, additional 
environmental monitoring, and land use 
censuses as part of their programs to 
assess and control dose within the 
proposed higher dose limits. 
In addition to the proposed changes to 
allow requests for NRC authorization, 
on a case-by-case basis, for higher 
public dose limits in the controlled area 
and in the unrestricted area, the NRC is 
proposing two other changes to the 
requirements at § 20.1301: (1) changes to 
the limits that apply to caregivers of 
patients who cannot be released, and (2) 
deletion of the short-term dose rate limit 
for external sources in the unrestricted 
area. 
First, the NRC is proposing to allow 
higher doses to members of the public 
who visit and/or care for medical 
patients who cannot be released under 
the provisions of § 35.75. Limits that 
apply to patient release are contained in 
10 CFR part 35. The NRC has long 
permitted a member of the public to 
receive up to 500 mrem at the 
Authorized User’s (AU) discretion 
under § 20.1301(c). Additionally, the 
NRC has approved several exemptions 
to this regulation as described in 
Regulatory Issue Summary (RIS) 2006– 
18, ‘‘Requesting Exemption from the 
Public Dose Limits for Certain 
Caregivers of Hospital Patients.’’ These 
exemptions allowed a caregiver to 
receive up to 2 rem, by default, with the 
flexibility to increase that amount if it 
was too low for a particular case. 
Similar to these previously issued 
exemptions, the NRC proposes to revise 
§ 20.1301(c) to include a 2-rem limit for 
a caregiver and a 500-mrem limit for a 
non-caregiver member of the public per 
administration regimen. These limits are 
independent of the patient release 
regulations in 10 CFR 35.75, and doses 
accrued by caregivers or non-caregiver 
members of the public from exposure to 
a patient prior to release do not 
contribute to the patient’s release 
evaluation. The guidance in RIS 2006– 
18 and the exemption process remain 
available to licensees should they desire 
to pursue authorization, on a case-by- 
case basis, to exceed the proposed new 
2-rem limit for caregivers. 
Amending the regulations to allow 
caregivers to receive up to 2 rem 
without a licensee requesting and 
having approved an exemption 
increases licensee flexibility, reduces 
regulatory cost and burden, and enables 
licensees to provide more timely care to 
patients while maintaining the public 
health and safety. The justification for 
the higher limit to the caregiver (i.e., 2 
rem instead of 100 mrem) is that it is 
beneficial, or possibly essential, to the 
wellbeing of the patient for caregivers to 
have access to the patient and may, 
therefore, be considered an element of 
the patient’s medical treatment. 
Caregivers are usually members of the 
patient’s family or someone close to the 
family or the patient. Caregivers receive 
no financial compensation for the 
comfort or support that they provide a 
patient and knowingly consent to being 
exposed above the public dose limit. 
Additionally, the higher dose limit is 
temporary and would not significantly 
impact the caregiver’s lifetime fatal 
cancer risk. Similarly, the justification 
for the higher limit to the non-caregiver 
(i.e., 500 mrem instead of 100 mrem) is 
that the higher dose limit is temporary 
and would not significantly impact the 
individual’s lifetime fatal cancer risk. A 
non-caregiver being exposed in a 
situation relevant to § 20.1301(c) is 
likely also a family member or a friend 
of the patient, thus their access to the 
patient provides relief during medical 
treatment. In ICRP Publication 60— 
which provided the ICRP’s first set of 
comprehensive recommendations after 
the recommended public dose limit was 
changed to its current value—the ICRP 
stated in paragraph 192 that, ‘‘Since the 
detriment is a function of the 
accumulation of dose over many years, 
it would be unduly restrictive to require 
the controls to be related rigidly to 
annual dose limits. Some flexibility in 
the limits is desirable.’’ Accordingly, 
with this proposed rulemaking the NRC 
is proposing to exercise this flexibility 
as it relates to patient care. 
Second, the NRC is proposing to 
delete the short-term dose rate limit in 
the unrestricted area of 0.002 rem in any 
hour in § 20.1301(b) because it serves no 
safety purpose that is not already 
achieved by the public dose limit of 100 
mrem per year. This is because a 
member of the public could receive the 
full 100 mrem annual public dose 
instantaneously and this fact in and of 
itself would have minimal safety 
impact. The actual concern in such a 
hypothetical case would be that a source 
that could provide such a high dose rate 
would most assuredly result in an 
exceedance of the annual public dose 
limit in a short period of time and it is 
that exceedance that would require 
appropriate corrective actions and not 
the exceedance of any rate limit in 
receiving the dose. Licensees can 
voluntarily include short-term dose rate 
limits within their radiation protection 
programs for the purposes of dose 
management or to facilitate 
investigations of abnormal conditions; 
however, these are not necessary in 
addition to the annual public dose limit 
for the protection of the public health 
and safety. Therefore, the NRC is 
proposing to delete § 20.1301(a)(2) and 
the provision in § 20.1302(b)(2)(ii) that 
references 2 mrem in an hour. 
License Termination Criteria 
The NRC is proposing to revise the 
license termination criteria in 10 CFR 
part 20 subpart E to make conforming 
changes based on the discontinuation of 
the use of ALARA terminology in the 
NRC’s regulations and guidance. 
Specifically, the NRC is removing the 
terms ‘‘as low as reasonably achievable’’ 
and ‘‘ALARA’’ from subpart E and 
replacing them, as appropriate. As 
explained previously in this document, 
the NRC’s regulations and guidance 
would continue to use justification and 
optimization analyses to satisfy the 
original intent of the ALARA principle 
of, in this instance, reducing residual 
radioactivity to levels where further 
reductions would not be justified for 
both unrestricted and restricted use. The 
NRC intends for licensees to continue 
providing a combination of qualitative 
and quantitative analyses consistent 
with the guidance in NUREG–1757, 
volume 2, appendix N to satisfy the 
requirement to justify such reductions 
in residual radioactivity. 
Additionally, the NRC is proposing to 
include a reference to § 20.1406(c) to its 
radiological criteria for unrestricted use 
at § 20.1402 to emphasize that the 
reduction in residual radioactivity may 
be justified by actions already taken by 
the licensee to minimize contamination. 
For example, licensees may be able to 
take credit for performing 
dismantlement and remediation 
activities in a way that minimizes the 
introduction of contamination to the 
environment in the analysis to 
demonstrate that further reductions are 
not justified. The NRC’s proposed 
reference to this requirement would 
provide additional flexibility in the 
justification analysis required to comply 
with the proposed radiological criteria 
for unrestricted and restricted use. 
With respect to restricted use, under 
§ 20.1403 and § 20.1404, the NRC is 
proposing to increase clarity for 
licensees to demonstrate compliance 
with the proposed requirement that 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 7 ---
43475 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
further reductions in residual 
radioactivity necessary to comply with 
the provisions of § 20.1402 would not be 
justified. Currently, licensees must 
demonstrate that such reductions either 
would result in net public, or 
environmental harm or are consistent 
with ALARA. The NRC is proposing to 
introduce significantly more clarity by 
updating the requirement to include an 
explicit option to provide a cost-benefit 
analysis. 
Finally, the NRC is making the 
language in 10 CFR part 20 subpart E 
consistent by using the broader term 
‘‘traffic accidents’’ throughout instead of 
sometimes using the narrower term 
‘‘deaths from transportation accidents.’’ 
The term ‘‘traffic accidents’’ 
encompasses the term ‘‘deaths from 
transportation accidents.’’ 
Respiratory Protection 
The NRC is proposing to make 
changes to its respiratory protection 
regulations to enable more efficient 
authorizations of respiratory equipment 
and their use. Currently, licensees are 
required to obtain individual 
authorization from the NRC in order to: 
(1) use respiratory equipment that has 
not been authorized by the National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH), and (2) use assigned 
protection factors (APFs) in excess of 
those specified in 10 CFR part 20. 
Through this rulemaking, a licensee 
would be allowed instead to reference 
approvals that the NRC has already 
issued to other licensees to use non- 
NIOSH certified equipment and/or to 
exceed the APFs in 10 CFR part 20; 
provided that the conditions in the 
safety evaluations used by the NRC to 
justify such approvals are applicable to 
that licensee. Effectively, this would 
mean that the NRC would only have to 
review and approve the use of new 
equipment or APFs once, and 
subsequent licensees could avail 
themselves of those approvals to the 
extent that they apply in their cases. 
This change would facilitate the use of 
modern equipment while minimizing 
risk and administrative burden because 
regulatory experience has shown that 
these reviews have not significantly 
differed once a precedent is established. 
In cases where the conditions of prior 
approvals would not apply or where 
licensee use of the equipment would not 
be within the scope of what the NRC 
considered in its safety evaluation, the 
licensee would have to individually 
apply for authorization as the 
regulations currently require. 
Doses Received by a Member of the 
Public Due to Byproduct Material 
Administered for Medical Purposes 
The NRC is proposing changes to 10 
CFR part 35 regarding the release of 
patients who have been administered 
byproduct material. The first proposed 
change would add to 10 CFR 35.2 the 
definitions of ‘‘caregiver’’ and 
‘‘administration regimen.’’ The 
proposed definition of ‘‘caregiver’’ is an 
adult who provides the patient with 
support or comfort for non-commercial 
gains following administration of 
byproduct material. The proposed 
definition of ‘‘administration regimen’’ 
is the course of administrations of a 
given radiopharmaceutical or 
brachytherapy source as intended by the 
authorized user. The second proposed 
change would amend 10 CFR 35.75 to 
add a provision to allow a consenting 
caregiver, who has been educated on the 
risks of radiation exposure, to receive 
up to 5 rem (i.e., the occupation dose 
limit of 10 CFR 20.1201) per patient 
administration regimen. The dose limit 
to the general public would remain at 
0.5 rem; however, the rule would be 
revised to specify that this limit is per 
administration regimen instead of per 
release. The third proposed change 
would amend 10 CFR 35.2075 to remove 
the requirement to keep records of dose 
evaluations for individual releases that 
meet certain criteria. Instead, the 
proposed change would require 
licensees to develop, implement, and 
maintain a written procedure for 
ensuring that a member of the public is 
not likely to exceed the established 
limits. The licensee would be required 
to retain this procedure for the duration 
of the license. Additionally, the 
proposed change would remove the 
requirement to document each instance 
where instructions are given to a 
breastfeeding patient. 
In 2002, the NRC adopted the current 
dose-based criteria used in 10 CFR 
35.75. At that time, the patient release 
framework was developed to address 
brachytherapy implants and single 
administration therapies (e.g., I–131 
therapy for conditions of the thyroid). 
Also at that time, other applications of 
byproduct material use in medicine did 
not involve quantities that would 
warrant concern regarding the release of 
patients. The medical landscape has 
evolved substantially since the current 
10 CFR 35.75 was put in place. Namely, 
radiopharmaceuticals are increasingly 
being administered over a series of 
administrations as a matter of protocol, 
instead of all at once. With the proposed 
changes to 10 CFR 35.75, the NRC 
intends to adapt its patient release 
framework to better address the 
evolving use of byproduct material in 
medicine. While the limit for dose 
received by an individual member of the 
public is 0.5 rem per patient 
administration regimen, the NRC is 
proposing to introduce flexibility 
through the identification of a caregiver, 
who is eligible to receive up to the 
occupational dose limit (i.e., 5 rem) per 
patient administration regimen. 
Individuals identified as caregivers (e.g., 
spouses, parents) are likely to receive 
the most dose as a result of a given 
patient release due to high duration or 
close contact activities, such as co- 
sleeping. Other members of the public 
are unlikely to receive a dose on the 
same order of magnitude as these 
potential caregivers. This is reflected in 
DG–8061 (the proposed revision 2 to 
Regulatory Guide (RG) 8.39) by using an 
assumed occupancy factor of 0.25 at 1 
meter for a general member of the public 
(also referred to as a bystander) and an 
assumed occupancy factor of 1 at 1 
meter for a caregiver in the tables 
provided. RG 8.39 contains additional 
information regarding patient-specific 
calculations for added flexibility, 
including lower occupancies for both 
caregivers and other members of the 
public. 
The NRC is also proposing to change 
the recordkeeping requirements for 
patient release outlined in 10 CFR 
35.2075 to better align with common 
practice. Most patients are likely to fall 
into certain categories that a licensee 
has previously determined to be 
compliant with release in accordance 
with 10 CFR 35.75. It is unnecessarily 
burdensome for licensees to retain the 
bases of release for individual patients 
who are released in such a way. As 
such, the NRC is proposing to instead 
require licensees to develop, implement, 
and maintain a written procedure for 
releasing patients in accordance with 10 
CFR 35.75. The NRC is also proposing 
to remove the requirement to 
individually document when a 
breastfeeding patient has been given 
instructions following administration of 
byproduct material. The procedures 
required by the proposed 10 CFR 35.75 
should detail the process for ensuring 
compliance for all patients who have 
been administered byproduct material, 
including situations where licensees 
provide instructions to patients who are 
breastfeeding. This change is intended 
to alleviate the burden associated with 
prescriptive recordkeeping requirements 
and to instead focus on the need to 
maintain a robust patient release 
program that enables the treatment of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 8 ---
43476 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
patients while protecting members of 
the public. 
For patients who cannot be released 
under 10 CFR 35.75, the NRC is 
proposing to amend 10 CFR 20.1301 to 
incorporate into that rule flexibilities 
introduced in RIS 2006–18. The 
proposed changes to 10 CFR 20.1301(c) 
would permit licensees, without having 
to apply for an exemption, to allow a 
caregiver, newly defined in the 
proposed changes to 10 CFR part 35, to 
receive up to 2 rem while providing care 
to a patient who cannot be released 
under 10 CFR 35.75. Any receipt of dose 
in excess of 2 rem would still require an 
application for an exemption and case- 
by-case prior approval by the NRC. 
In 2002, the NRC amended 10 CFR 
part 20 to allow some visitors of patients 
who cannot be released under 10 CFR 
35.75 to receive up to 500 mrem. At that 
time, the NRC acknowledged that, 
because visitors are often family 
members or close friends of patients, 
there is a substantial benefit that 
outweighs the risk of additional 
exposure. However, as the medical use 
of byproduct material has changed, it 
has come to the NRC’s attention that a 
limit of 500 mrem is insufficient and 
overly cautious for some situations. 
While RIS 2006–18 does not set a 
maximum dose for which a licensee 
may apply for an exemption, 2 rem is 
the established initial dose limit for the 
outlined exemption. The NRC has 
already deemed a limit of 2 rem 
adequately protective for situations 
where a caregiver is necessary while a 
patient is hospitalized, provided that 
the licensee justifies the use of the 
exemption. The proposed rule would 
therefore eliminate the need for 
licensees to apply for an exemption for 
caregiver doses up to 2 rem. For 
caregiver doses in excess of 2 rem, 
licensees may still refer to RIS 2006–18. 
Note that caregiver doses received prior 
to the patient’s release do not contribute 
to the 5 rem allowed by 10 CFR 35.75 
following release. Finally, the proposed 
update to 10 CFR 20.2107 would require 
licensees to retain a record of the 
justification for a caregiver’s dose for 
three years following the exposure. 
Industrial Radiography 
The NRC is proposing to remove from 
10 CFR part 34 the definition of the term 
‘‘ALARA’’ in § 34.3 and the prescriptive 
list of the radiation safety officer (RSO) 
responsibilities in § 34.42(c), which 
includes the term ‘‘ALARA.’’ Removing 
this term is consistent with the other 
changes being made as part of this 
rulemaking and removing the RSO 
responsibilities is consistent with other 
similar descriptions of requirements for 
RSOs. Licensees would continue to be 
able to look to guidance in NUREG– 
1556, volume 2, for more detailed 
information regarding the 
responsibilities of an RSO for industrial 
radiography. 
Uniform Waste Manifest Forms 
The NRC is also proposing changes to 
10 CFR part 20 appendix G to provide 
additional clarity and flexibility on how 
the information requested on the 
Uniform Waste Manifest forms (NRC 
Forms 540 and 540A, 541 and 541A, 
and 542 and 542A) could be provided. 
The proposed changes would clarify 
that the Manifest does not need to 
include these NRC forms themselves as 
long as the Manifest reflects the 
information requested on the applicable 
NRC forms. Other proposed changes 
would remove language specifying 
when NRC Form 540 must physically 
accompany a shipment and would 
instead reference Department of 
Transportation (DOT) regulations. This 
change would ensure that the NRC’s 
regulations are consistent with the 
DOT’s regulations, including potential 
future changes to the DOT’s regulations. 
The remaining proposed changes would 
add clarity and correct minor 
grammatical errors. 
Clarifying Changes to Appendix A to 10 
CFR Part 40 
The NRC is proposing a change to the 
introduction section of Appendix A to 
10 CFR part 40. The purpose of this 
change would be to clarify that the use 
of the phrase ‘‘as low as is reasonably 
achievable’’ in Appendix A has the 
same meaning as in EPA’s generally 
applicable standards in 40 CFR part 192, 
which is different than how NRC has 
traditionally used ALARA. In this 
context, the use of the phrase ‘‘as low 
as reasonably achievable’’ is focused on 
the technical practicability of corrective 
actions. The remaining proposed 
changes to Appendix A are consistent 
with the proposed changes to 10 CFR 
part 20 in that they would require 
licensees to manage dose within the 
applicable limits and would require that 
practicable dose reduction measures be 
taken. The proposed changes would 
remove any language that implies that 
further dose reduction is required. In 
this context, the phrase ‘‘as low as 
reasonably achievable’’ will remain in 
Appendix A, Criterion 5B(6) to conform 
to EPA’s generally applicable standards 
in 40 CFR part 192. 
Conforming Changes to 10 CFR Parts 50, 
61, 71, and 72 
This proposed rule would also 
include additional conforming changes 
to align with the removal of references 
to ALARA. This includes the removal of 
a reference to ALARA in 10 CFR 50.66 
and in 10 CFR 71.78. Additionally, 
removals of references to ALARA are 
proposed in 10 CFR part 72, specifically 
in §§ 72.3, 72.24, 72.44, 72.104, and 
72.126. The changes proposed to 
§ 72.44(d)(3) are conforming changes to 
align with the proposed changes to 
effluent reporting requirements in 10 
CFR 50.34a, which are discussed in the 
previous section entitled ‘‘Effluents.’’ 
Finally, the NRC is proposing to 
revise the public dose limits in 10 CFR 
part 61 to make conforming changes 
based on the discontinuation of the use 
of ALARA terminology in the NRC’s 
regulations and guidance. Specifically, 
the NRC is proposing to remove the 
terms ‘‘as low as reasonably achievable’’ 
and ‘‘ALARA’’ from subpart C, 
‘‘Performance Objectives.’’ 
Conforming Changes to 10 CFR Part 53 
The changes proposed in this 
rulemaking necessitate conforming 
changes to the recently issued 10 CFR 
part 53. In general, these changes serve 
two purposes. First, they acknowledge 
that licensees may potentially use 
dosimetry systems that provide results 
in terms of total effective dose, as 
opposed to total effective dose 
equivalent. Second, they provide the 
additional flexibility that is being 
included in the proposed changes to the 
NRC’s overall radiation protection 
regulatory framework based on the 
agency’s reconsideration of its use of the 
LNT model and its application of the 
ALARA principle. 
The regulations at § 53.210, § 53.425, 
and § 53.530 are proposed to be revised 
to add reference to total effective dose 
to the units for dose-based criteria. 
Additionally, footnote 1 to § 53.210 is 
proposed to be revised to delete ‘‘TEDE’’ 
as the designation of the type of 
effective dose is not central to the 
purpose of the footnote, rather the 
magnitude of the dose is. The 
requirements at § 53.850 are proposed to 
be revised to change ‘‘limiting’’ to 
‘‘controlling’’ to be consistent with the 
intent of effluent monitoring and control 
measures. Additionally, § 53.850(b)(2) is 
proposed to be revised to remove 
reference to the ‘‘Annual Radiological 
Environmental Operating and 
Radioactive Effluent Release Reports,’’ 
in lieu of a more generalized 
requirement for an effluent program to 
retain records and develop reporting 
criteria. This change conforms to 
changes being proposed in this 
rulemaking for radiological effluent 
monitoring and control through 
revisions to § 50.34a, § 50.36a, and 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 9 ---
43483 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
The NRC is proposing to assign these 
regulations Category B because the use 
of dosimetry methods is cross- 
jurisdictional and the uniformity of 
approved alternatives is necessary to 
ensure an orderly regulatory pattern for 
the use and regulation of material 
between all Agreement States and NRC 
jurisdictions. 
Next, the NRC is proposing to change 
the compatibility category of 10 CFR 
20.1301(d) from Category C to Category 
A. Currently, 10 CFR 20.1301(d) allows 
a licensee or applicant to apply for prior 
NRC authorization to operate in excess 
of the public dose limit (i.e., 100 mrem) 
for an individual member of the public, 
up to 500 mrem, and specifies the 
information the entity should provide in 
this application. The proposed revision 
to 10 CFR 20.1301(d) would remove the 
500 mrem upper limit. This change does 
not affect the ability for Agreement 
States to approve an optional upper 
public dose limit consistent with past 
practices. With the removal of that 
upper limit and the regulation tied to 
the public dose limit of 100 mrem, the 
NRC proposes designating the 
regulation Compatibility Category A, 
consistent with the designation for the 
public dose limit. 
For the newly proposed 10 CFR 
20.1205, which concerns a new process 
for allowing workers to receive 
occupational doses in excess of 
applicable annual limits, the NRC is 
proposing to assign Compatibility 
Category A. As explained above, this 
optional process in the newly proposed 
10 CFR 20.1205 would allow licensees 
to periodically exceed annual 
occupational dose limits for workers, 
provided that an adequate decision- 
making process is applied to support its 
use and that the overall dose is limited 
within specified multi-year average 
values. The proposed approach would 
allow for dose averaging across several 
years to demonstrate compliance with 
occupational dose limits. Similar to 10 
CFR 20.1301(d) for the public dose 
limit, 10 CFR 20.1205 allows licensees 
flexibility with respect to the 
occupational dose limit. Thus, the NRC 
proposes designating 10 CFR 20.1205 as 
Category A, consistent with the 
designation for the occupational dose 
limit itself and the similar proposed 
designation for 10 CFR 20.1301(d) for 
the public dose limit flexibility. 
Moreover, in order to protect radiation 
workers’ ability to work in different 
jurisdictions within the same calendar 
year when utilizing this provision, it is 
necessary for all jurisdictions to have 
the same flexibility built into their 
regulations. 
With respect to 10 CFR part 35, the 
NRC is proposing to assign 
compatibility Category B to the new 
definitions for ‘‘Caregiver’’ and 
‘‘Administration regimen’’ as well as the 
revised 10 CFR 35.75(b) regarding the 
dose limits for patient release, which 
means that these requirements have 
cross-jurisdictional boundaries 
implications. Agreement States’ 
requirements should be essentially 
identical to those of the NRC so that 
there are consistent standards for 
patient release requirements between 
the NRC and the Agreement States. 
Since the 2002 adoption of the current 
dose-based criteria in 10 CFR 35.75, the 
treatment and release of patients with 
byproduct materials have undergone a 
number of significant changes with 
regard to the doses and administrative 
regimens of therapeutic radioisotopes 
used, treatment modalities, and the 
treatment and release of patient at 
regional treatment centers that require 
patients to travel in multiple 
jurisdictions. These changes require 
consistent standards to ensure 
equivalent levels of protection. For 
example, an increasing number of 
therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals are 
being delivered over the course of 
multiple administrations. Safe 
implementation of the proposed 
revision to 10 CFR 35.75(b) relies on 
consistent application of release 
considerations over the course of the 
entire administration regimen, which 
could be delivered in multiple 
jurisdictions. 
The compatibility (A, B, C, D, and 
NRC) and adequacy (H&S) categories are 
designated in the following tables: 
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 19 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
19.12 ..................... Amend ............. Instruction to workers ............................. C ............................... .............................. C. 
19.13 ..................... Amend ............. Notifications and reports to individuals .. C ........................................ ..................... C. 
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 20 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Airborne radioactivity area ... A ........................................... .................. A. 
20.1003 ................. Delete .............. Definition—ALARA ................................. A.
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Annual limit on intake .......... A ......................................... .................... A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Committed Dose Equivalent A ............................................... .............. A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Committed equivalent dose ............................................... ................. A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Committed effective dose 
equivalent.
A ............................................................. A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Committed effective dose .... ............................................ .................... A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Derived air concentration .... A ............................................ ................. A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Dose or radiation dose ........ D ........................................... .................. D. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Dose equivalent ................... A ....................................... ...................... A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Dosimetry method (or sys-
tem).
................................................................ A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Effective dose ...................... .................................... ............................ A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Effective dose equivalent .... A ............................................ ................. A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Equivalent Dose .................. ....................................... ......................... A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Graded approach to dose 
management.
................................................................ A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—License ................................ D ............................................................. D. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Nonstochastic effect ............ A ......................................... .................... A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Planned special exposure ... D .............................................. ............... D. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 10 ---
43484 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 20—Continued 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Planned occupational dose 
limit extension.
................................................................ A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Radiation weighting factor ... ........................................... ..................... A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Stochastic effects ................ A ....................................... ...................... A. 
20.1003 ................. New ................. Definition—Total effective dose ............. ....................................... ......................... A. 
20.1003 ................. Amend ............. Definition—Weighting factor ................... A ...................................... ....................... A. 
20.1004 ................. Amend ............. Units of radiation dose ........................... A .................................. ........................... A. 
20.1010 ................. New ................. Dosimetry methods ................................ .................................. .............................. B. 
20.1101(a) and (c) Amend ............. Radiation protection programs ............... H&S ........................................... ............. H&S. 
20.1101(b) ............. Amend ............. Radiation protection programs ............... H&S ....................................... ................. A. 
20.1101(d) ............. Amend ............. Radiation protection programs ............... C ............................................................. A, except portions of these provisions 
are designated as NRC (Those por-
tions of the provision that address 
areas reserved to the NRC, e.g., 10 
CFR Parts 50.34a and 53.260 are 
designated as a Compatibility Cat-
egory NRC). 
20.1201 ................. Amend ............. Occupational dose limits for adults ........ A ......................................... .................... A. 
20.1202 ................. Amend ............. Compliance with requirements for sum-
mation of external and internal doses.
A ............................................................. A. 
20.1204 ................. Amend ............. Determination of internal exposure ........ A .......................................... ................... A. 
20.1205 ................. New ................. Planned occupational dose limit exten-
sion.
................................................................ A. 
20.1206 ................. Amend ............. Planned special exposures .................... D ....................................... ...................... D. 
20.1301(a), (b), (c) Amend ............. Dose limits for individual members of 
the public.
A ............................................................. A. 
20.1301(d) ............. Amend ............. Dose limits for individual members of 
the public.
C ............................................................. A. 
20.1302(b) ............. Amend ............. Compliance with dose limits for indi-
vidual members of the public.
H&S ........................................................ H&S. 
20.1302(c) ............. Amend ............. Compliance with dose limits for indi-
vidual members of the public.
D ............................................................. D. 
20.1402 ................. Amend ............. Radiological criteria for unrestricted use C ............................................................. B—for source material recovered from 
any mineral resources processed pri-
marily for purposes other than obtain-
ing the source material content. 
C—for all other Agreement State li-
censed activities.* 
20.1403 ................. Amend ............. Criteria for license termination under re-
stricted conditions.
C ............................................................. B—for source material recovered from 
any mineral resources processed pri-
marily for purposes other than obtain-
ing the source material content. 
C—for all other Agreement State li-
censed activities.* 
20.1404 ................. Amend ............. Alternate criteria for license termination C ............................................................. B—for source material recovered from 
any mineral resources processed pri-
marily for purposes other than obtain-
ing the source material content. 
C—for all other Agreement State li-
censed activities.* 
20.1405 ................. Amend ............. Public notification and public participa-
tion.
C ............................................................. C. 
20.1502 ................. Amend ............. Conditions requiring individual moni-
toring of external and internal occupa-
tional dose.
H&S ........................................................ H&S. 
20.1601(f) .............. Amend ............. Control of access to high radiation 
areas.
H&S ........................................................ H&S. 
20.1702 ................. Amend ............. Use of other controls .............................. H&S ............................... ......................... H&S. 
20.1703 ................. Amend ............. Use of individual respiratory protection 
equipment.
H&S ........................................................ H&S. 
20.1704 ................. Amend ............. Further restrictions on the use of res-
piratory protection equipment.
D ............................................................. D. 
20.1705 ................. Amend ............. Application for use of higher assigned 
protection factors.
B ............................................................. B. 
20.1905(b) ............. Amend ............. Exceptions to labeling requirements ...... A ............................................ ................. A. 
20.2002 ................. Amend ............. Method for obtaining approval of pro-
posed disposal procedures.
D ............................................................. D. 
20.2003 
(a)(2)&(a)(3).
Amend ............. Disposal by release into sanitary sewer-
age.
A ............................................................. A. 
20.2004 ................. Amend ............. Treatment or disposal by incineration .... D ........................................... .................. D. 
20.2101 ................. Amend ............. General provisions ................................. C ................................. ............................ C. 
20.2104 ................. Amend ............. Determination of prior occupational 
dose.
D or H&S (for States who adopt 
planned special exposure).
D or H&S (for States who adopt 
planned special exposure. 
20.2105 ................. Amend ............. Records of planned special exposures .. D .............................................. ............... D. 
20.2106(a) ............. Amend ............. Records of individual monitoring results C ............................................ ................. C. 
20.2107 ................. Amend ............. Records of dose to individual members 
of the public.
D ............................................................. D. 
20.2202(e) ............. Amend ............. Notification of incidents .......................... D .................................. ........................... D. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 11 ---
43485 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 20—Continued 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
20.2203(a), (b) ...... Amend ............. Reports of exposures, radiation levels, 
and concentrations of radioactive ma-
terial exceeding the constraints or 
limits.
C ............................................................. C. 
Appendix G ........... Amend ............. Requirements for Low-level radioactive 
waste intended for disposal at land 
disposal facilities and manifests.
B ............................................................. B. 
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Manifest .................................................. B ......................... .................................... B. 
App. G I ................. New ................. Definition—Carrier .................................. .............................. .................................. B. 
App. G I ................. Delete .............. Definition—Computer readable medium B.
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Definition—EPA identification number ... B ............................................ ................. B. 
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Definition—High integrity container ........ B ........................................ ..................... B. 
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Definition—NRC Forms 540, 540A, 541, 
541A, 542, and 542A.
B ............................................................. B. 
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Definition—Shipping paper .................... B ...................................... ....................... B. 
App. G I ................. Amend ............. Definition—Uniform Low-Level Radio-
active Waste Manifest.
B ............................................................. B. 
App. G III.A ........... Amend ............. Control and Tracking .............................. B ................................... .......................... B. 
App. G III.B ........... Amend ............. Control and Tracking .............................. B ................................... .......................... B. 
App. G III.C ........... Amend ............. Control and Tracking .............................. B ................................... .......................... B. 
App. G III.D ........... Amend ............. Control and Tracking .............................. B ................................... .......................... B. 
Appendix H ............ New ................. Alternative Dosimetry Methods Accept-
able for Use to Demonstrate Compli-
ance with NRC’s Standards for Pro-
tection Against Radiation.
................................................................ B. 
* Consistent with 10 CFR 20.1401(a), the criteria in 10 CFR part 20, subpart E do not apply to uranium and thorium recovery facilities already subject to appendix A 
to 10 CFR part 40 or the uranium solution extraction facilities. 
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 34 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
34.3 ....................... Delete .............. Definitions—ALARA ............................... [A].
34.42(c), (d) ........... Delete .............. Radiation Safety Officer for industrial ra-
diography.
D.
ADEQUACY AND COMPATIBILITY TABLE FOR 10 CFR PART 35 
Section Change Subject 
Compatibility 
Existing New 
35.2 ....................... New ................. Definitions—Administration Regimen ..... ......................................... ....................... B. 
35.2 ....................... New ................. Definitions—Caregiver ........................... ................................................................ B. 
35.75(a) ................. Revised ........... Release of individuals containing un-
sealed byproduct material or implants 
containing byproduct material.
C ............................................................. C. 
35.75(b) ................. Amend ............. Release of individuals containing un-
sealed byproduct material or implants 
containing byproduct material.
C ............................................................. B. 
35.75(c) ................. Amend ............. Release of individuals containing un-
sealed byproduct material or implants 
containing byproduct material.
C ............................................................. C. 
35.75(d) ................. Amend ............. Release of individuals containing un-
sealed byproduct material or implants 
containing byproduct material.
D ............................................................. D. 
35.2075 ................. Amend ............. Records of the release of individuals 
containing unsealed byproduct mate-
rial or implants containing byproduct 
material.
D ............................................................. D. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 12 ---
43494 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
§ 50.34a or § 53.260 of this chapter, such 
that the individual member of the 
public likely to receive the highest dose 
will not be expected to receive a total 
effective dose equivalent in excess of 25 
mrem (0.25 mSv) per year from these 
emissions. If a licensee subject to this 
requirement exceeds this dose 
constraint, the licensee shall report the 
exceedance as provided in § 20.2203 
and promptly take appropriate 
corrective action to ensure against 
recurrence. A licensee or applicant may 
request prior NRC authorization to 
establish a higher constraint, provided 
that the proposed constraint provides an 
ample margin of safety to protect public 
health. 
■ 9. Revise and republish § 20.1201(a) 
through (d) to read as follows: 
§ 20.1201 Occupational dose limits for 
adults. 
(a) The licensee shall control the 
occupational dose to individual adults, 
except for planned occupational dose 
limit extensions under § 20.1205 and 
planned special exposures under 
§ 20.1206, to the following dose limits. 
(1) An annual limit, which is the more 
limiting of— 
(i) The total effective dose equivalent 
being equal to 5 rems (0.05 Sv); or 
(ii) The sum of the deep-dose 
equivalent and the committed dose 
equivalent to any individual organ or 
tissue other than the lens of the eye 
being equal to 50 rems (0.5 Sv). 
(2) The annual limits to the lens of the 
eye, to the skin of the whole body, and 
to the skin of the extremities, which are: 
(i) A lens dose equivalent of 15 rems 
(0.15 Sv), and 
(ii) A shallow-dose equivalent of 50 
rem (0.5 Sv) to the skin of the whole 
body or to the skin of any extremity. 
(b) Doses received in excess of the 
annual limits, with the exception of 
doses received under § 20.1205, 
including doses received during 
accidents, emergencies, and planned 
special exposures, must be subtracted 
from the limits for planned special 
exposures that the individual may 
receive during the current year (see 
§ 20.1206(e)(1)) and during the 
individual’s lifetime (see 
§ 20.1206(e)(2)). 
(c) When the external exposure is 
determined by measurement with an 
external personal monitoring device, the 
deep-dose equivalent must be used in 
place of the effective dose equivalent, 
unless the effective dose equivalent is 
determined by a dosimetry method 
approved by the NRC or by an 
alternative dosimetry method pursuant 
to § 20.1010. The assigned deep-dose 
equivalent must be for the part of the 
body receiving the highest exposure. 
The assigned shallow-dose equivalent 
must be the dose averaged over the 
contiguous 10 square centimeters of 
skin receiving the highest exposure. The 
deep-dose equivalent, lens-dose 
equivalent, and shallow-dose equivalent 
may be assessed from surveys or other 
radiation measurements for the purpose 
of demonstrating compliance with the 
occupational dose limits, if the 
individual monitoring device was not in 
the region of highest potential exposure, 
or the results of individual monitoring 
are unavailable. 
(d) Derived air concentration (DAC) 
and annual limit on intake (ALI) values 
are presented in table 1 of appendix B 
to part 20 and may be used to determine 
the individual’s dose (see § 20.2106) and 
to demonstrate compliance with the 
occupational dose limits. Alternatively, 
the licensee may use alternative 
dosimetry methods to demonstrate 
compliance with the occupational dose 
limits (see § 20.1010). 
* * * * * 
■ 10. In § 20.1202, revise footnote 1 to 
read as follows: 
§ 20.1202 Compliance with requirements 
for summation of external and internal 
doses. 
* * * * * 
[1] An organ or tissue is deemed to be 
significantly irradiated if, for that organ or 
tissue, the product of the weighting factor, 
wT, and the committed dose equivalent, 
HT,Q,50, per unit intake is greater than 10 
percent of the maximum weighted value of 
HT,Q,50, (i.e., wT HT,Q,50) per unit intake for 
any organ or tissue. 
■ 11. In § 20.1204, revise paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (3), (e)(1), and (h)(2), to read 
as follows: 
§ 20.1204 Determination of internal 
exposure. 
* * * * * 
(c) * * * 
(2) Upon prior approval of the 
Commission or consistent with the use 
of alternative dosimetry methods to 
demonstrate compliance with dose 
limits as allowed by § 20.1010, adjust 
the DAC or ALI values to reflect the 
actual physical and chemical 
characteristics of airborne radioactive 
material (e.g., aerosol size distribution 
or density); and 
(3) If applicable, separately assess the 
contribution of fractional intakes of 
different solubility classes (e.g., Class D, 
W, or Y compounds of a given 
radionuclide (see appendix B to part 
20)) to the committed effective dose 
equivalent. 
* * * * * 
(e) * * * 
(1) The sum of the ratios of the 
concentration to the appropriate DAC 
value (e.g., D, W, Y) from appendix B to 
part 20, or as determined using an 
alternative dosimetry method as 
allowed by § 20.1010, for each 
radionuclide in the mixture; or 
* * * * * 
(h) * * * 
(2) When the ALI (and the associated 
DAC) is determined by the 
nonstochastic organ dose limit of 50 rem 
(0.5 Sv), the licensee may, as a 
simplifying assumption, use the 
stochastic ALIs to determine committed 
effective dose equivalent. However, if 
the licensee uses the stochastic ALIs, 
the licensee must also demonstrate that 
the limit in § 20.1201(a)(1)(ii) is met. 
Table 1 of appendix B to part 20 lists 
stochastic ALIs, even when the limiting 
ALI and DAC is governed by the 
nonstochastic organ dose limit of 50 rem 
(0.5 Sv). In cases where a licensee is 
using an alternative dosimetry method 
pursuant to § 20.1010, that licensee can 
develop the stochastic ALI to use for the 
purposes of this paragraph. 
■ 12. Add section § 20.1205 to subpart 
C to read as follows: 
§ 20.1205 Planned occupational dose limit 
extension. 
A licensee may authorize a worker 
that is not a declared pregnant woman 
or a minor to receive occupational doses 
in excess of the limits specified in 
§ 20.1201 provided that each of the 
following conditions is satisfied— 
(a) The licensee (and employer if the 
employer is not the licensee) authorizes 
the planned occupational dose limit 
extension, in writing, before the dose 
limit specified in § 20.1201 is exceeded. 
(b) Before a planned occupational 
dose limit extension, the licensee 
ensures that the individuals involved 
are— 
(1) Informed of the purpose of the 
planned operation; 
(2) Informed of the estimated doses 
and associated potential risks and 
estimated radiation levels or other 
conditions that might be involved in 
performing the task; and 
(3) Instructed in the measures to be 
taken to manage doses considering other 
risks that may be present. 
(c) Prior to permitting an individual to 
participate in a planned occupational 
dose limit extension, the licensee 
ascertains prior occupational doses as 
required by § 20.2104(b) during the 
current year and the preceding four 
years for each individual involved. 
(d) The licensee does not authorize a 
planned occupational dose limit 
extension that would cause an 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 13 ---
43495 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
individual to receive a dose from all 
occupational exposures in excess of— 
(1) Five times the numerical limits in 
§ 20.1201(a)(1) and § 20.1201(a)(2)(ii) 
over the current year and the preceding 
four years; 
(2) Twice the numerical limits in 
§ 20.1201(a)(1) and § 20.1201(a)(2)(ii) in 
any one year; and 
(3) A lens dose equivalent of 15 rem 
(0.15 Sv) in any one year. 
(e) The licensee maintains records of 
the conduct of a planned occupational 
dose limit extension in accordance with 
§ 20.2105. 
(f) The dose from planned 
occupational dose limit extensions is 
not to be considered in controlling 
future occupational dose of the 
individual under § 20.1201(a) but is to 
be included in evaluations required by 
§§ 20.1205 (c) and (d) and 20.1206 (d) 
and (e). 
■ 13. In § 20.1206, revise paragraph 
(c)(3) to read as follows: 
§ 20.1206 Planned special exposures. 
* * * * * 
(c) * * * 
(3) Instructed in the measures to be 
taken to manage doses considering other 
risks that may be present. 
* * * * * 
■ 14. In § 20.1301, revise paragraph 
(a)(1), remove and reserve paragraph 
(a)(2), and revise paragraphs (b) through 
(d) to read as follows: 
§ 20.1301 Dose limits for individual 
members of the public. 
(a) * * * 
(1) The total effective dose equivalent 
to individual members of the public 
from the licensed operation, or any 
other source of radiation under the 
control of a licensee, does not exceed 
0.1 rem (1 mSv) in a year, exclusive of 
the dose contributions from background 
radiation, from any medical 
administration the individual has 
received, from exposure to individuals 
administered radioactive material and 
released under § 35.75, from voluntary 
participation in medical research 
programs, and from the licensee’s 
disposal of radioactive material into 
sanitary sewerage in accordance with 
§ 20.2003. 
(2) [Reserved] 
(b) If the licensee permits members of 
the public to have access to controlled 
areas, the limits for members of the 
public continue to apply to those 
individuals. Alternatively, a licensee or 
applicant may request prior NRC 
authorization for an annual dose limit in 
excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv) for members 
of the public who have access to 
controlled areas, provided that dose is 
appropriately managed. 
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, a licensee may permit 
members of the public to visit an 
individual who cannot be released, 
under § 35.75, to receive a radiation 
dose in excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv) if— 
(1) The radiation dose received is not 
likely to exceed either— 
(i) 0.5 rem (5 mSv) for a member of 
the public who is not a caregiver per 
administration regimen; or 
(ii) 2 rem (20 mSv) for a caregiver, as 
defined in 10 CFR part 35, per 
administration regimen; and 
(2) The authorized user, as defined in 
10 CFR part 35, has determined before 
the visit that it is appropriate. 
(d) A licensee or applicant may apply 
for prior NRC authorization to operate 
with an annual dose limit for an 
individual member of the public in 
excess of 0.1 rem (1 mSv). The licensee 
or applicant shall include the following 
information in this application: 
(1) Demonstration of the need for and 
the expected duration of operations in 
excess of the limit in paragraph (a) of 
this section; 
(2) Description of the licensee’s 
program to assess and control dose 
within the proposed dose limit for an 
individual member of the public; and 
(3) The proposed dose limit for an 
individual member of the public and its 
supporting basis, including why it 
remains protective of the public health 
and safety. 
* * * * * 
■ 15. In § 20.1302, revise paragraph 
(b)(2) and remove and reserve paragraph 
(c) to read as follows: 
§ 20.1302 Compliance with dose limits for 
individual members of the public. 
* * * * * 
(b) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(2) Demonstrating that— 
(i) The annual average concentrations 
of radioactive material released in 
gaseous and liquid effluents at the 
boundary of the unrestricted area do not 
exceed the values specified in table 2 of 
appendix B to part 20 or as developed 
using alternative dosimetry methods 
pursuant to § 20.1010; and 
(ii) If an individual were continuously 
present in an unrestricted area, the dose 
from external sources would not exceed 
0.05 rem (0.5 mSv) in a year. 
(c) [Reserved] 
■ 16. Revise § 20.1402 to read as 
follows: 
§ 20.1402 Radiological criteria for 
unrestricted use. 
A site will be considered acceptable 
for unrestricted use if the residual 
radioactivity that is distinguishable 
from background radiation results in a 
TEDE to the average member of the 
critical group that does not exceed 25 
mrem (0.25 mSv) per year, including 
that from groundwater sources of 
drinking water, and, consistent with 
§ 20.1406(c), the residual radioactivity 
has been reduced to levels where further 
reductions would not be justified when 
considering any detriments, such as 
traffic accidents, expected to potentially 
result from decontamination and waste 
disposal. 
■ 17. In § 20.1403, revise paragraph (a) 
and revise and republish paragraph (e) 
to read as follows: 
§ 20.1403 Criteria for license termination 
under restricted conditions. 
* * * * * 
(a) The licensee can demonstrate that 
further reductions in residual 
radioactivity necessary to comply with 
the provisions of § 20.1402 would not be 
justified when considering any 
detriments, such as traffic accidents, 
expected to potentially result from 
decontamination and waste disposal; 
would result in net public or 
environmental harm; or would not be 
justified through a cost-benefit analysis; 
* * * * * 
(e) Residual radioactivity at the site 
has been reduced so that if the 
institutional controls were no longer in 
effect, there is reasonable assurance that 
the TEDE from residual radioactivity 
distinguishable from background to the 
average member of the critical group 
would not exceed either— 
(1) 100 mrem (1 mSv) per year 
provided that the licensee— 
Demonstrates that further reductions 
in residual radioactivity would not be 
justified when considering any 
detriments, such as traffic accidents, 
expected to potentially result from 
decontamination and waste disposal; or 
(2) 500 mrem (5 mSv) per year 
provided that the licensee— 
(i) Demonstrates that further 
reductions in residual radioactivity 
necessary to comply with the 100 
mrem/y (1 mSv/y) value of paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section are not technically 
achievable, would be prohibitively 
expensive, or would result in net public 
or environmental harm; 
(ii) Makes provisions for durable 
institutional controls; 
(iii) Provides sufficient financial 
assurance to enable a responsible 
government entity or independent third 
party, including a governmental 
custodian of a site, both to carry out 
periodic rechecks of the site no less 
frequently than every 5 years to assure 
that the institutional controls remain in 
place as necessary to meet the criteria of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 14 ---
43496 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
§ 20.1403(b) and to assume and carry 
out responsibilities for any necessary 
control and maintenance of those 
controls. Acceptable financial assurance 
mechanisms are those in paragraph (c) 
of this section. 
■ 18. In § 20.1404, revise and republish 
paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(4) to read 
as follows: 
§ 20.1404 Alternate criteria for license 
termination. 
(a) * * * 
(1) Provides assurance that public 
health and safety would continue to be 
protected by submitting an analysis 
demonstrating that it is unlikely that the 
dose from all man-made sources 
combined, other than medical, would be 
more than 100 mrem/y (1 mSv/y); 
(2) Has employed to the extent 
practical restrictions on site use 
according to the provisions of § 20.1403 
in minimizing exposures at the site; 
(3) Demonstrates that further 
reductions in residual radioactivity 
would not be justified when considering 
any detriments, such as traffic 
accidents, expected to potentially result 
from decontamination and waste 
disposal; 
(4) Has submitted a decommissioning 
plan or License Termination Plan (LTP) 
to the Commission indicating the 
licensee’s intent to decommission in 
accordance with §§ 30.36(d), 40.42(d), 
50.82(a) and (b), subpart G of part 53, 
70.38(d), or 72.54 of this chapter, and 
specifying that the licensee proposes to 
decommission by use of alternate 
criteria. The licensee shall document in 
the decommissioning plan or LTP how 
the advice of individuals and 
institutions in the community who may 
be affected by the decommissioning has 
been sought and addressed, as 
appropriate, following analysis of that 
advice. In seeking such advice, the 
licensee shall provide for: 
(i) Participation by representatives of 
a broad cross section of community 
interests who may be affected by the 
decommissioning; 
(ii) An opportunity for a 
comprehensive, collective discussion on 
the issues by the participants 
represented; and 
(iii) A publicly available summary of 
the results of all such discussions, 
including a description of the 
individual viewpoints of the 
participants on the issues and the extent 
of agreement and disagreement on the 
issues; and 
* * * * * 
■ 19. In § 20.1405, revise paragraph (b) 
to read as follows: 
§ 20.1405 Public notification and public 
participation. 
* * * * * 
(b) Publish a notice in the Federal 
Register and in a forum, such as local 
newspapers, letters to State or local 
organizations, or other appropriate 
forum, that is readily accessible to 
individuals in the vicinity of the site, 
and solicit comments from affected 
parties. 
■ 20. In § 20.1502, revise introductory 
text and paragraphs (a)(4) and (b)(1) to 
read as follows: 
§ 20.1502 Conditions requiring individual 
monitoring of external and internal 
occupational dose. 
Each licensee shall monitor exposures 
to radiation and radioactive material at 
levels sufficient to demonstrate 
compliance with the occupational dose 
limits of this part. 
(a) * * * 
(4) Individuals entering a high or very 
high radiation area. These individuals 
shall be monitored for external 
occupational dose, unless any of the 
conditions of § 20.1502(b) apply, in 
which case they shall be monitored for 
both external and internal occupational 
dose. 
(b) * * * 
(1) Adults likely to receive, in 1 year, 
an intake in excess of 10 percent of the 
applicable ALI(s) in table 1, columns 1 
and 2, of appendix B to §§ 20.1001– 
20.2402 or as developed using 
alternative dosimetry methods pursuant 
to § 20.1010; 
* * * * * 
§ 20.1601 [Amended] 
■ 21. In § 20.1601(f), remove the text 
‘‘ALARA’’. 
■ 22. Revise and republish § 20.1702 to 
read as follows: 
§ 20.1702 Use of other controls. 
(a) When it is not practical to apply 
process or other engineering controls to 
control the concentrations of radioactive 
material in the air to values below those 
that define an airborne radioactivity 
area, the licensee shall increase 
monitoring and limit intakes by one or 
more of the following means— 
(1) Control of access; 
(2) Limitation of exposure times; 
(3) Use of respiratory protection 
equipment; or 
(4) Other controls. 
(b) If the licensee performs an analysis 
to determine whether or not respirators 
should be used, the licensee may 
consider safety factors other than 
radiological factors. The licensee should 
also consider the impact of respirator 
use on workers’ industrial health and 
safety. 
■ 23. In § 20.1703, revise paragraph (b) 
to read as follows: 
§ 20.1703 Use of individual respiratory 
protection equipment. 
* * * * * 
(b) If the licensee wishes to use 
equipment that has not been tested or 
certified by NIOSH, or for which there 
is no schedule for testing or 
certification, the licensee shall submit 
an application to the NRC for authorized 
use of this equipment except as 
provided in this part. The application 
must include evidence that the material 
and performance characteristics of the 
equipment are capable of providing the 
proposed degree of protection under 
anticipated conditions of use. This must 
be demonstrated either by licensee 
testing or on the basis of reliable test 
information. The use of equipment that 
has not been tested or certified by 
NIOSH, but has previously been 
approved for use by the NRC, does not 
require an application and its approval 
as described in this paragraph, provided 
that the licensee maintains an 
evaluation to demonstrate that the bases 
for the previous NRC approval—as 
documented in the applicable safety 
evaluation—are applicable to the 
licensee’s facility. 
* * * * * 
§ 20.1704 [Amended] 
■ 24. In § 20.1704(a), remove the text 
‘‘ALARA’’ and add in its place, ‘‘within 
the requirements of this part’’. 
■ 25. In § 20.1705, add paragraph (c) to 
read as follows: 
§ 20.1705 Application for use of higher 
assigned protection factors. 
* * * * * 
(c) The use of higher assigned 
protection factors that have previously 
been approved for use by the 
Commission does not require an 
application and its approval as 
described in this section, provided that 
the licensee maintains an evaluation to 
demonstrate that the bases for the 
previous Commission approval—as 
documented in the applicable safety 
evaluation—are applicable to the 
licensee’s facility. 
■ 26. In § 20.1905, revise paragraph (b) 
to read as follows: 
§ 20.1905 Exemptions to labeling 
requirements. 
* * * * * 
(b) Containers holding licensed 
material in concentrations less than 
those specified in table 3 of appendix B 
to part 20 or concentrations derived 
using alternative dosimetry methods 
pursuant to § 20.1010; or 
* * * * * 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 15 ---
43497 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
§ 20.2002 [Amended] 
■ 27. In § 20.2002(d), remove the text 
‘‘ALARA and’’. 
■ 28. In § 20.2003, revise paragraphs 
(a)(2) and (a)(3)(i) to read as follows: 
§ 20.2003 Disposal by release into sanitary 
sewerage. 
(a) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(2) The quantity of licensed or other 
radioactive material that the licensee 
releases into the sewer in 1 month 
divided by the average monthly volume 
of water released into the sewer by the 
licensee does not exceed the 
concentration listed in table 3 of 
appendix B to part 20 or concentrations 
derived using alternative dosimetry 
methods pursuant to § 20.1010; and 
(3) * * * 
(i) The licensee shall determine the 
fraction of the limiting concentration in 
table 3 of appendix B to part 20, or the 
limiting concentrations derived using 
alternative dosimetry methods pursuant 
to § 20.1010, represented by discharges 
into sanitary sewerage by dividing the 
actual monthly average concentration of 
each radionuclide released by the 
licensee into the sewer by the applicable 
limiting concentration; and 
* * * * * 
§ 20.2004 [Amended] 
■ 29. In § 20.2004, remove from the first 
sentence in paragraph (b)(1) the text 
‘‘the requirements of appendix I to part 
50 of this chapter and’’. 
§ 20.2101 [Amended] 
■ 30. In § 20.2101, remove from 
paragraph (c) the text ‘‘Not 
withstanding’’ and replace with 
‘‘Notwithstanding’’. 
■ 31. In § 20.2104, revise paragraphs (b) 
and (e)(2) to read as follows: 
§ 20.2104 Determination of prior 
occupational dose. 
* * * * * 
(b) Prior to permitting an individual 
to participate in a planned occupational 
dose limit extension or a planned 
special exposure, the licensee shall 
determine— 
(1) For a planned occupational dose 
limit extension— 
(i) Prior occupational doses during the 
current year and the preceding four 
years that correspond to the applicable 
limits in § 20.1205(d) for each 
individual involved. 
(2) For a planned special exposure— 
(i) The internal and external doses 
from all previous planned special 
exposures; and 
(ii) All doses in excess of the limits 
(including doses received during 
accidents and emergencies) received 
during the lifetime of the individual. 
* * * * * 
(e) * * * 
(2) That the individual is not available 
for planned occupational dose limit 
extensions, if records for the current 
year and the preceding four years are 
not complete, and planned special 
exposures. 
* * * * * 
■ 32. In § 20.2105: 
■ a. Revise the section heading and 
paragraphs (a)(5) and (6); 
■ b. Redesignate paragraph (b) as 
paragraph (c); and 
■ c. Add a new paragraph (b). 
The revisions and addition read as 
follows: 
§ 20.2105 Records of planned 
occupational dose limit extensions and 
planned special exposures. 
(a) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(5) How doses were managed; and 
(6) The doses received by individuals 
involved in the planned special 
exposure. 
(b) For each use of the provisions of 
§ 20.1205 for planned occupational dose 
limit extensions, the licensee shall 
maintain records that describe the 
circumstances requiring the extension of 
occupational dose limits, how doses 
were managed, and the doses received 
by individuals involved in the planned 
occupational dose limit extension. 
■ 33. In § 20.2106, revise paragraph (a) 
introductory text and paragraphs (a)(5) 
through (7) to read as follows: 
§ 20.2106 Records of individual monitoring 
results. 
(a) Recordkeeping requirement. Each 
licensee shall maintain records of doses 
received by individuals for whom 
monitoring was required pursuant to 
§ 20.1502 and records of doses received 
during planned occupational dose limit 
extensions, planned special exposures, 
accidents, and emergency conditions. 
These records [5] must include, when 
applicable— 
(1) * * * 
(5) The total effective dose equivalent 
when required by § 20.1202; 
(6) The total of the deep-dose 
equivalent and the committed dose to 
the organ receiving the highest total 
dose; and 
(7) In cases where monitoring was 
required pursuant to § 20.1502, but the 
dose received did not exceed 10 percent 
of the applicable monitoring criteria, the 
licensee may, instead of recording the 
numerical value of the dose received, 
annotate that an occupational dose was 
received but did not exceed the criteria 
for recording. 
* * * * * 
[5] Assessments of dose equivalent and 
records made using units in effect before the 
licensee’s adoption of this part need not be 
changed. 
■ 34. In § 20.2107, add paragraphs (c) 
and (d) to read as follows: 
§ 20.2107 Records of dose to individual 
members of the public. 
* * * * * 
(c) The licensee shall retain a record 
of the justification for the dose received 
by a caregiver as described in 
§ 20.1301(c)(1)(ii). 
(d) The licensee shall retain the 
records required by paragraph (c) of this 
section for 3 years after the final date of 
the allowed exposure. 
■ 35. In § 20.2202, revise paragraph (e) 
to read as follows: 
§ 20.2202 Notification of incidents. 
* * * * * 
(e) The provisions of this section do 
not include doses that result from 
planned occupational dose limit 
extensions or from planned special 
exposures that are within the limits for 
planned special exposures, and that are 
reported under § 20.2204. 
■ 36. In § 20.2203: 
■ a. revise and republish paragraph 
(a)(2) and 
■ b. remove the text ‘‘ALARA’’ from 
paragraph (b)(iv). 
The revision reads as follows: 
§ 20.2203 Reports of exposures, radiation 
levels, and concentrations of radioactive 
material exceeding the constraints or limits. 
(a) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(2) Doses in excess of any of the 
following: 
(i) The occupational dose limits for 
adults in § 20.1201 unless they are 
exceeded pursuant to § 20.1205 or 
§ 20.1206; except that reporting of 
unplanned exceedances of the limit in 
20.1201(a)(1)(i) is required only if the 
total effective dose equivalent for the 
current year and the preceding four 
years exceeds 25 rem; or 
(ii) The occupational dose limits for a 
minor in § 20.1207; or 
(iii) The limits for an embryo/fetus of 
a declared pregnant woman in 
§ 20.1208; or 
(iv) The limits for an individual 
member of the public in § 20.1301, 
except that reporting of exceedances of 
the limit in § 20.1301(a) is required only 
if the total dose to a single individual 
for the current year and the preceding 
four years exceeds 500 mrem; or 
(v) Any applicable limit in the 
license; or 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2
--- page 16 ---
43498 Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 134 / Wednesday, July 15, 2026 / Proposed Rules 
(vi) The constraints for air emissions 
established under § 20.1101(d); or 
(vii) The applicable dose limit for a 
planned occupational dose limit 
extension in § 20.1205(c); or 
(viii) The applicable dose limit for a 
planned special exposure in 
§ 20.1206(e); or 
* * * * * 
■ 37. In appendix G to 10 CFR part 20: 
■ a. Revise and republish the 
introductory paragraphs to Section I; 
add a definition for ‘‘Carrier’’; remove 
the definition for ‘‘Computer readable 
medium’’; and revise the definitions for 
‘‘EPA identification number’’, ‘‘High 
integrity container’’, ‘‘NRC Forms 540, 
540A, 541, 541A, 542, and 542A’’, 
‘‘Shipping paper’’, and ‘‘Uniform Low- 
Level Radioactive Waste Manifest or 
uniform manifest’’; 
■ b. Revise paragraph III.A.6, paragraph 
III.B.4, paragraph III.C.7, and paragraph 
III.D.2.; and 
■ c. Amend paragraph III.E.1. to remove 
the text ‘‘or receipt’’ and add, in its 
place, ‘‘of receipt’’. 
The revisions read as follows: 
Appendix G to Part 20—Requirements 
for Transfers of Low-Level Radioactive 
Waste Intended for Disposal at 
Licensed Land Disposal Facilities and 
Manifests 
I. Manifest 
A waste generator, collector, or processor 
who transports, or offers for transportation, 
low-level radioactive waste intended for 
ultimate disposal at a licensed low-level 
radioactive waste land disposal facility must 
prepare a Manifest (OMB Control Numbers 
3150–0164,-0165, and-0166) reflecting 
information requested on applicable NRC 
Forms 540 (Uniform Low-Level Radioactive 
Waste Manifest (Shipping Paper)) and 541 
(Uniform Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
Manifest (Container and Waste Description)) 
and, if necessary, on an applicable NRC Form 
542 (Uniform Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
Manifest (Manifest Index and Regional 
Compact Tabulation)). The Manifest does not 
need to use these NRC Forms themselves as 
long as the Manifest reflects the information 
requested on the applicable NRC Forms. 
References to NRC Forms 540, 540A, 541, 
541A, 542, and 542A in this appendix refer 
to either the NRC Form(s) or any other 
document(s) reflecting the information 
requested on the NRC Form(s) (e.g., licensee- 
generated versions of the NRC Forms). 
Upon agreement between shipper and 
consignee, NRC Forms 540 and 540A, 541 
and 541A, and 542 and 542A may be 
completed, signed, transmitted, and stored in 
electronic media with the capability for 
producing legible, accurate, and complete 
records on the respective forms. NRC Forms 
540 and 540A must be transmitted to the 
carrier in accordance with regulations of the 
Department of Transportation (DOT). 
Licensees are not required by NRC to 
comply with the manifesting requirements of 
this part when they ship: 
(a) LLW for processing and expect its 
return (i.e., for storage under their license) 
prior to disposal at a licensed land disposal 
facility; 
(b) LLW that is being returned to the 
licensee who is the ‘‘waste generator’’ or 
‘‘generator,’’ as defined in this part; or 
(c) Radioactively contaminated material to 
a ‘‘waste processor’’ that becomes the 
processor’s ‘‘residual waste.’’ 
For guidance in completing these forms, 
refer to the instructions that accompany the 
forms. Copies of manifests required by this 
appendix may be legible carbon copies, 
photocopies, computer printouts, or 
electronic copies that reproduce the data of 
the uniform manifest. 
NRC Forms 540, 540A, 541, 541A, 542 and 
542A, and the accompanying instructions, in 
hard copy, may be obtained by writing or 
calling the Office of the Chief Information 
Officer, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission, Washington, DC 20555–0001, 
telephone (301) 415–5877, or by visiting the 
NRC’s website at http://www.nrc.gov and 
selecting forms from the index found on the 
home page. 
This appendix includes information 
requirements of the DOT, as codified in 49 
CFR parts 172, 174, 175, 176, and 177. 
Information on hazardous, medical, or other 
waste, required to meet Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) regulations, as 
codified in 40 CFR parts 259, 261, or 
elsewhere, is not addressed in this section. 
However, any forms required by the EPA 
must accompany the Uniform Low-Level 
Radioactive Waste Manifest required by this 
chapter. 
As used in this appendix, the following 
definitions apply: 
Carrier means a person who transports 
passengers or property in commerce by rail 
car, aircraft, motor vehicle, or vessel. 
* * * * * 
EPA identification number means the 
number received by a carrier following 
application to the Administrator of EPA as 
required by 40 CFR part 263. 
* * * * * 
High integrity container (HIC) means a 
container commonly designed to meet the 
structural stability requirements of § 61.56 of 
this chapter, and to meet DOT requirements 
for a Type A package. 
* * * * * 
NRC Forms 540, 540A, 541, 541A, 542, and 
542A mean either the NRC Form(s) or any 
other document(s) reflecting the information 
requested on the NRC Form(s) (e.g., licensee- 
generated or Agreement State-generated 
versions of the NRC Forms). 
* * * * * 
Shipping paper means NRC Form 540 and, 
if required, NRC Form 540A which includes 
the information required by DOT regulations. 
* * * * * 
Uniform Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
Manifest or uniform manifest means the 
combination of NRC Forms 540, 541, and, if 
necessary, 542, and their respective 
continuation sheets as needed. 
* * * * * 
III. Control and Tracking 
A. * * * 
6. If required by regulations of the DOT, 
physically include NRC Form 540 (and NRC 
Form 540A, if required) with the shipment 
regardless of the option chosen in paragraph 
A.5 of this section; 
* * * * * 
B. * * * 
4. If required by regulations of the DOT, 
physically include NRC Form 540 (and NRC 
Form 540A, if required) with the shipment 
regardless of the option chosen in paragraph 
B.3 of this section; 
* * * * * 
C. * * * 
7. If required by regulations of the DOT, 
physically include NRC Form 540 (and NRC 
Form 540A, if required) with the shipment 
regardless of the option chosen in paragraph 
C.6 of this section; 
* * * * * 
D. * * * 
2. Maintain copies of or electronically store 
all completed manifests and electronically 
store the information required by 10 CFR 
61.80(l) until the Commission terminates the 
license; and 
* * * * * 
■ 38. Add new appendix H to part 20 to 
read as follows: 
Appendix H to Part 20—Alternative 
Dosimetry Methods Acceptable for Use 
To Demonstrate Compliance With 
NRC’s Standards for Protection Against 
Radiation 
(a) Material incorporated by reference. The 
material listed in this appendix for 
developing alternative dosimetry methods is 
incorporated by reference into § 20.1010 with 
the approval of the Director of the Office of 
the Federal Register under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) 1 
CFR part 51. All approved material is 
available for inspection at the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) and at the 
National Archives Records Administration 
(NARA). Contact the NRC at NRC Technical 
Library, Two White Flint North, 11545 
Rockville Pike, Rockville, Maryland 20852; 
telephone: 301–415–7000; email: 
Library.Resource@nrc.gov. For information 
on the availability of this material at NARA, 
visit https://www.archives.gov/federal- 
register/cfr/ibr-locations.html or email 
fr.inspection@nara.gov. The material may 
also be obtained from the following sources: 
(1) American National Standards Institute/ 
American Nuclear Society (ANSI/ANS), 
ATTN Standards, 555 N Kensington Avenue, 
La Grange Park, IL 60526; https://
webstore.ansi.org/. 
(i) ANSI/ANS–6.1.1–2020, ‘‘Photon and 
Neutron Fluence-to-Dose Conversion 
Coefficients.’’ IBR approved for § 20.1010(a). 
(ii) Reserved 
(2) International Commission on 
Radiological Protection (ICRP), 350 Albert 
Street Suite 410, Ottawa, Ontario, K1R 1A4, 
Canada; https://www.icrp.org/index.asp. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:30 Jul 14, 2026 Jkt 268001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\15JYP2.SGM 15JYP2khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with PROPOSALS2